Notes on Love in a Tamil Family

Prologue
A Note on Theory

We anthropologists have inner cosmologies of our own, of course. Most
of us would freely admit it. We hold tight to our visions and our dreams,
even if it means keeping our eyes closed much of the time.1
One of our most compelling dreams, one that we hold tightest to, is the
dream of wholeness, the vision of a world whose meaning is contained
within itself, of a life that is complete, of a place where all things touch.
That wholeness is for us (modem people) only a dream, that we lack it
and that it is something we long for has been repeatedly revealed to us by
the weavers of some of our greatest current cosmologies—Durkheim,
Freud, Marx, Sapir—dreamers of wholeness themselves, who convinced
us (anthropologists) to believe in that dream, showed us that it was lost,
and inspired us to travel to the most distant corners of the earth in hopes
of its recovery.2
Like many other people in the world, we are inclined to give our vision
of wholeness the shape of a living body. In this form it is called "the
organic metaphor." Many of us have called this "metaphor" too mystical,
or too optimistic, yet we have perpetuated it covertly in structural linguistics and structural anthropology. When we read Jakobson's description of
the growth of language in the child, there comes before our minds an
image of the primordial cell dividing into members of a whole which
complement each other lovingly and completely: mama and papa, and in
between, the child, mediating, differentiating, and completing the golden
triangle.3 The art of Lévi-Strauss unfolds a grander vision of text after
text—in no matter what diverse environments, languages, and material
media—linking together analogically, lending meaning to each other,
sharing an underlying code (again, like the cells of a body), and allowing
for the manifestation of every form of life and its opposite, in a world
where all the texts know and complete each other.4
xvii

xviii

/

Prologue

But in Levi-Strauss's work there is from the beginning, and increasingly as his explorations widen, a realization that completeness is not in
any one self, or set of selves, or in any one culture, or set of cultures, but
always over the horizon of one's knowledge, however vast. And finally,
there is a recognition that the self-existent, underlying code for which one
searches (now, following Victor Hirner, we may call it logos) is nowhere, and (in Boon's words) "only the voyage is real."5
Presently that branch of anthropology concerned with "thought-systems," "language," and "symbols" has been broken into (inevitably) by
other disciplines, and feeling its own integrity lost, is entering a new
phase.6 In this phase, a radically decentered view of the human condition
emerges, in which the image of an underlying, unifying code is seen to be
a tyrannous illusion, communication is less to be valued than polyphony
or even discord, the self is intrinsically and as a consequence of its very
inception not whole, and meaning, as either the intended goal or the
intending source of action, whatever gives wholeness to being, cannot be
found to "exist" at all. Some people call this phase "post-modern." All
they mean by the use of this term is that intellectuals in the current age no
longer are able to believe that they have arrived at the beginning of Utopia; we can no longer consider perfection to be within our grasp. Imperfection is what we live with. It is life. Thus for anthropologists, the
boundless, ragged, and plural collection of things called "context" has
become more real than the neat, discrete, and well-ordered thing called
"text"; and "performance" with all its flaws and slips has become more
real and more interesting than the never-realized perfection of potential
we call "competence."7
In this book what I wish to do is take an ethnographic situation and
describe it in such a way as to try to mediate between the old wholistic and
the new decentered visions of the human condition. This must sound
grandiose. What I mean is that my book stands more or less self-consciously between these two poles. On the one hand, I wish to recognize
that the desire for wholeness is an important presence in some if not all
cultures, that it is something that could be said to have been shared by
myself and my companions in the ethnographic situation to be described,
and that it was indeed what brought us together into this situation in the
first place. That we had this desire in common might be attributed to the
fact that we both come from "logocentric," Indo-European-dominated
civilizations, or it might not, I don't know.8 That we are not unique in this
respect among ethnographer-informant teams appears to me probable.
On the other hand, I would like to take as presupposed the necessary

Prologue

/

xix

and intrinsic nonwholeness both of the self and of culture, and the fromthe-beginning plurality of both of these (maybe fictional) entities.
In modern ethnography, plurality and the absence of wholeness are
facts to which we return again and again, both on the level of culture and
on the level of the self—in, for instance, studies of pluralistic societies;
studies of spirit-possession; on-the-ground studies of language; and studies seeking to determine other people's ideas of what a "person" or a
"self" is. 9 But for the most part, wholeness is still taken as normative, plurality and fragmentation as unusual and to-be-explained.
One advantage of taking plurality as basically the way things are is that
it makes us realize that the ethnographic situation (confrontation between
"field worker" and "native") is not really all that strange, and it may make
us feel more comfortable about focusing on that situation for what it is and
playing it as it lays. Since we are no longer searching for an underlying
code, we may allow our writing to be less abstract, not so far removed
from our experience. We may not feel so inclined to pretend in our
monographs that we don't exist. 10 We may be able to act upon the faith
that "culture" is created only in the confrontation between cultures,11 as
"self" is created only in the confrontation between selves. When we see
ourselves as co-constructors of culture at culture's boundaries, there may
evolve a more symmetrical relationship between ourselves on one side of
the boundary and our informants on the other. We may be able to come
to terms with the fact that "meaning" cannot be pinned down, is always
sought but never apprehended, is never this and never that, never here nor
there but always in between, always inherently elusive and always inherently ambiguous. We may come to accept this ambiguity as that which is
created by us and our informants and that which binds us to them. We
may accept it as the closest we will ever come to the fulfillment of our
desire.

CHAPTER ONE

What Led Me to Them

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

More than a quarter of my life has passed since I began writing this book.
Its heart has stayed constant during this time, but its features have
changed and changed again as I have moved and taken it with me from
one world to another to another. It is beginning to look to me now as I
look to myself, like a beaten-up suitcase with a lot of stickers on it.
The story I tell in this starting chapter describes the events that led up
to my living with a South Indian Tamil family some years ago and to my
writing about them now. One or two pages are about my pre-India days
and about what I think led me to go to India in the first place. The rest of
this chapter is about some of the things I learned in India from Indians—
in particular, from one person—about how what I learned from experience meshed or failed to mesh with what I learned from books, and about
how a Tamil poem, partially and for a brief time, became my life. A few
stanzas of this poem are presented later in this chapter. These stanzas are
complex and much of what they refer to is foreign to people of this
country, so I offer an explication of them which is partly my own and
partly that of the man who taught them to me. You, reader, may find these
poem-fragments dense and strange, but don't for that reason ignore them,
for in fact they are alive, and they are stronger than they seem, clad as
they are in my homespun translations. Behind the translations and explications are the Tamil songs that are the reason for this book. This book is
built to hold them, and through it they may be heard to echo by those who
listen closely. They are the voices of people who lived hundreds of years
ago, but they are also the voices of people who live now. The things I
want you to know but haven't the power to say, these other voices will
tell you.
1

2

/

What Led Me to Them

The remaining chapters of this book are about exactly what the title
says, love in a Tamil family, the family of the man who taught me the
poem. These chapters describe different aspects of Tamil family life that
touch upon love—kinship organization, childrearing, sexual relations,
habits of speaking, rules of behavior. The central topic of this book—in
Tamil, anpu, in English, "love"—is a feeling, and my approach to the
study of this feeling has been through feeling. I have tried throughout the
course of my research and writing to remain honest, clear-headed, and
open-minded, and to follow the dictates of reason and empirical observation in my descriptions and analyses of the events I have sought to comprehend. But I have not attempted to be "objective" in the common sense
of this term. I have never pretended to be be disinterested or uninvolved
in the lives of my informants, and I have never set my own feelings aside.
Only by heeding them have I been able to learn the lessons that I try, in
this volume, to pass on.
I was bom in 1948. My father, a psychiatrist, spent the war as a naval
doctor in China and Okinawa, and he brought home paintings and tapestries of landscapes, birds, horses, courtly lovers, heavens, earths, and
hells. I lived many hours of my childhood in those pictures. My mother's
best friend from her childhood in Los Angeles was Hisako Nishihara.
After the bombing of Pearl Harbor, Hisako's relatives were put in detention camps, though they were American citizens. Both mother and Hisako loved the beauty of life forms. They were honors students in bacteriology at UCLA. When I was about twelve I came across mother's college
notebooks, which she had saved, filled with pencil drawings of microbes,
each drawing precise and exquisite. Hisako became a laboratory assistant. Mother became a medical secretary. Both of them married their
doctor-bosses at the end of the war and spent the remainder of their lives
as housewives.
I was raised in Kentucky, my father's native home. Mother never felt
completely happy there. One of her adulthood friends was Alene Dorsey,
a black woman from the tobacco- and pig-growing area outside of Louisville; Alene's natal home had been a shack lined with newspaper. She
wanted something better for her family now, but the segregation laws in
effect in Kentucky at that time blocked her every effort. She was eighteen
when she went to work for my mother, put our household in order, and
started helping to raise me. I think I was three or four. I remember once
listening to the song "My Old Kentucky Home" (" . . . 'tis summer, the
darkies are gay. . .") and asking Alene, "Are you a darkie?" and Alene
bursting into tears.
Mother spoke often of the stupidity of racism and xenophobia. She
praised the beauty of Japanese culture. When I went to college, I consid-

What Led Me to Them

/

3

Plate 1. A sivalingam.
ered majoring in Japanese, but didn't. Perhaps it was too cool and northem for me. I loved biology, philosophy, religion, poetry, math, language. I didn't much like people. I ended up majoring in anthropology,
as a strange kind of compromise between these various loves and as a
concession to the species to which I grudgingly owed allegiance. I
thought that if I could learn to see human beings as a part of nature, I

4

/

What Led Me to Them

might learn to love them better. I read the classics in anthropology as they
were assigned. Emile Durkheim's organic metaphor (society is an organism) and Claude Lévi-Strauss's structuralism (mythic thought is wild
thought, wild thought is as patterned and well-ordered as a wild plant)
delighted me. When it came time to choose an area for field research, I
chose India.
Like the Asian brides I had heard of, I devoted my life to India before
I had even met it. I went to graduate school in anthropology, determined
to become a specialist in India.
"You know," said an older woman anthropologist to me and my
human husband, Keith, "this will mean long periods of time away from
home."
"We know," we answered eagerly, excitedly.
Unlike an Asian bride, I calculated that if my marriage with India got
too rough, I could always divorce myself from it. But I was wrong.
The college I went to was Harvard, but Keith was not a Harvard man.
I never liked Harvard men. I liked tough, working-class ones like Keith.
My mother's father was Irish, a worker in the steel mills of Pittsburgh
from the age of twelve. Mother idolized him. I was a populist to the core
and a lover of the underdog. Like a female coyote, if two males had ever
battled for me (none ever did) I would have gone with the loser.
I chose to do my field work in South India probably because, through
my mother, I am Irish. In many ways, South India is to North India as
Ireland is to England. South India has been dominated politically and
culturally by North India for many centuries. Tamils in particular, the
most populous of South Indian ethnic groups (defined by the language
they speak) take pride in their identity and more than once in this century
have attempted to establish a separate Tamil nation. Also like the Irish,
Tamils believe in strong sentiment: rage, grief, compassion, affection,
desire, laughter, and ecstasy are openly and frequently displayed in the
streets and courtyards of Tamil Nadu. And like the Irish, Tamils value the
gift of gab: fabulous conversationalists, storytellers, singers, and poets
abound among them.
TRADITIONAL INDIA

Now the first thing that this book is about is the way that India both
exceeds and shatters Western expectations, the way it both exceeded and
shattered mine. Of course there are the stereotypes: India is "more spiritual" than the West, its people "impoverished," "nonmaterialistic," "fatalistic," and "other-worldly," its society structured according to a "rigid

What Led Me to Them

/

5

caste hierarchy," its women "repressed" and "submissive," its villagers
"tradition-bound" and "past-oriented," their behavior ordered by "rituals"
and constrained by "rules" of "purity" and "pollution." These words are
not just products of popular Western fantasy. Scholars and specialists in
South Asian culture use them often.1 But one thing I learned in India was
that these words are just words, our words, to refer to certain scattered
events occurring in South Asia. The propositions they imply are partial
truths, half truths, and anyone going to India who expects all of Indian
life to conform to them will find herself merely deluded and confused. It
would almost be better, I think, if we could abandon such words, all those
words that imply explanation and understanding of such a large place as
India, at least those words whose referents are only scholarly abstractions, certainly those words over which academic people fight. Alas, if
you wish to address the academic specialists, you must use them.
I have tried, anyway, in my own narrative not to lean on such words
too much. This has not been difficult, because they explain very little of
what I experienced in India. The women I knew there, for instance, were
more aggressive than me, more openly sexual than me, more free in their
criticisms of their men than me. Here in America I often get in trouble for
arguing, losing my temper, speaking my mind. But in Tamil Nadu, one
of my woman friends, Anni, asked me pointedly, "Is it your habit to bow
and defer to everyone?" My personality in Tamil Nadu was no more sweet
and obliging than it is in America; if anything, I was more short-tempered
there. As for Anni, she was milder than many Tamil women I knew—
indeed, she was known for her patient and loving nature. But when she
accused me, through her question, of excessive deference, she was not
being sarcastic. Compared to her, I was a little mouse. The notion of the
repressed and submissive Indian woman simply did not apply to the people among whom I lived—and yet in some ways it did. Anni would not
have been Anni without her fidelity to her men and her ability to endure
hardship for their sake, to do without while they did with. She was proud
of these qualities of hers and wore them fiercely. They entitled her to
speak freely and to walk with her head held high.
Hierarchy ("the rule of the sacred") in India also was not what I expected. Ritual status unsupported by worldly power counted for very little
in the places where I lived. The highest caste in Anni's village, for instance, the caste with the greatest "ritual status" or "purity," the Brahmans, were a poor minority and were ordered about by the landowners
rather rudely. "Ritual purity" was, more than anything else, a matter of
material exchanges, a matter of food and a matter of sex. It was essentially what we would call a physical state, not what we would call a

6

/

What Led Me to Them

spiritual one. What we would call "spiritual purity," what Tamils call a
"pure heart," tuymaiyana manacu, was often, if anything, opposed to
ritual purity. South Indian devotional religion, bhakti, has as one of its
basic precepts the renunciation of ritual purity for the attainment of divine
grace. It is based on the simple idea that love is the way to freedom—love
that knows no boundaries, love that is common to all. People reviled for
their lack of ritual purity, people of "untouchable castes," tinda inahkal,
could claim by dint of this very lack to be most pure at heart. The suffering borne by those in states of social defilement itself made possible the
heart's more genuine purity. The clean and prosperous, it was said, felt
no need of gods. The entrance of deities into the bodies of certain people
during states of possession was proof of those people's inner purity. A
god would not enter an unclean place. But most of the possessed, all of
those possessed regularly by gods or goddesses, were members of lower,
"less clean" castes. In order to be filled with the grace of God, they said,
you had to have a kind of hunger, a kind of emptiness inside. Those on
top never knew such emptiness. And yet the shamans and shamanesses,
having a deity's power in them, gained by that fact a degree of worldly
influence that many a village Brahman might have envied.
Ritual purity, then, was not a dominant principle, certainly not the
reigning principle, on the so-called spiritual level. But neither was it
dominant on the so-called material level. Regarding food, ritual purity
was a matter of the "higher" feeding (in the closest and most intimate
sense) the "lower." But what did it matter whether food at a feast was
cooked and served by Brahman hands when they had no power over its
distribution? The questions that mattered most to people concerning food
were, Who owns the land on which it is grown? How much do the workers who grow it get paid? Who can buy it and who can sell it and for how
much? Who cares enough for me to see that I am fed? Who trusts me
enough to let me feed them? Who will go hungry for my sake? Who will
share meals with me? Who is truly one with me, who my friend? Such
questions were asked with respect not only to food, but to many other
kinds of bodily and material exchanges, from the loaning of money to the
offering of smiles and caresses. And they were asked not only within a
family, but between families, between castes, between species of animals, men, and gods.
Emotion, power, and the interest in form that we call ritual were all
tied up together, all shaded into each other. Worldly power was not just
a matter of who owned the land and the money. It was also a matter of
who had the unpredictable, dangerous love of the laborers, the landowners, the voters, the politicians, and the deities. Religion was not just a

What Led Me to Them

/

7

"belief-system" that started where empirical knowledge left off. It was
not an imaginative superstructure spun off of a hard material infrastructure. It was not a restricted, sacred domain cordoned off from the everyday, the profane. It was matam, "madness," a connection with chaotic,
invisible powers, present in all places, in all times. It was personality, it
was the physiology of plants and animals, it was economics, it was sex.
It was not "not real." Kinship organization, in the same way, was much
more than just "social structure," a stable architectural framework
through which generations passed. It was also a form of poetics, a set of
biochemical equations, a web of deep-seated longings. It could hardly be
called a "structure" at all, for protean variability in form was intrinsic to
it, and it was composed of those things that structural anthropologists are
always trying to get away from—unique and unpredictable human personalities. And yet beyond all these, there seemed to be in the kinship
ideal of South India something stable and eternal, for which all were
reaching.
India has often been called a "traditional" society. What some people
mean by this is that Indians live in a world resembling our own past. Of
course, this isn't true. It is also not true, as is often claimed, that Indians
look to the past for all the best things, so that they resist change as a matter
of principle. On each of my visits to Tamil Nadu, I found to my dismay
(for I was probably seeking some kind of Eden myself) that things were
changing fast. New kinds of rice were being grown, new kinds of song
were being sung, new kinds of marriage contracted. People realized that
things were not necessarily getting better—some of the changes were
definitely for the worse. Certain changes were widely regarded as evil,
but were accepted and perpetuated even by the people who purportedly
disapproved of them—the spread of the dowry system was a case in
point. Other changes were generally regarded as desirable—for instance
the acceptance of widow-remarriage—but were much more slowly being
put into practice. (Dowry marriage is a practice associated with North
India and with Brahmans; widow-remarriage with people of lower
castes.) Some relatively superficial changes were blatantly visible—
many more vehicles on the road. Other much deeper changes were more
hidden—many more children in school. Sometimes a change that might
be expected to kill tradition revitalized it: the abundance and popularity of
movies in South India in this century did not so much drown out folk
themes as give them a new and powerful medium. Religious cults such as
those of the "disease goddesses" grew stronger even as the old systems of
patronage and the old diseases were replaced with more modern ones.
Sometimes a change intended to be revitalizing turned out killing: old

8

/

What Led Me to Them

men said the new high-yield rice burned the belly and did not appease
hunger. Moreover it was a risky crop to grow; it required just the right
amount and kind of rain at just the right times, expensive fertilizers and
insecticides, and a large and reliable labor pool that had to be well paid.
Relying on such rice, you either lived in style or you starved, farmers
told me. Yet it was a status crop, and everyone who could afford to grow
it did.
To escape such changes, anthropologists often go to "remote" villages,
or at least old towns, where things are quieter. But change is everywhere—that the whole world is always changing is part of received,
"traditional" Indian wisdom.
EARLY EDUCATION

Our first extended visit to India came in 1975. Keith was thirty-one, I was
twenty-six, our son Daniel was four months in the arms. We lived in
Madras, the fourth largest city in India, capital of Tamil Nadu. Keith had
left his job as a high school teacher to come with me. I was doing my
dissertation research on "concepts of the body in South India." While I
was there, the object of my quest metamorphosed into "Tamil theories of
life processes." Perhaps this was my way of seeking nature within culture, order and beauty within the chaos and ugliness that is humankind.
Educated in the principles of cultural anthropology, I wanted something
whole and human, which yet was not deliberately manufactured by
human beings nor identical with them, something that grew spontaneously among them and could not be explained by history or individual
agency, something lawful but unpredictable, unified but collective, conscious but unconscious, detailed, alive, concrete, abstract, ideal, transcendent. Most of all what I searched for should be something true,
beautiful, and Indian that had never before been captured in either Indian
or Western books, but could be captured in mine. To find this thing was
not an easy task.
I went searching for "good informants." Mostly I found two kinds: (1)
scholars who quoted to me from books; (2) ordinary folks who couldn't
understand what I was doing or what I wanted of them and were afraid to
try and answer my abstract philosophical questions. The months rolled
by. We visited villages, thinking of a move, but we were strangers everywhere and no place seemed satisfactory. Every kind of person was in
Madras city. I thought if I just kept trying, I would find a way to fit things
together. I continued to visit people who for some reason or other might
have something interesting to say about life processes, and I tried to get

What Led Me to Them

/

9

to know the people around me, to befriend them, at least not to alienate
them, to live according to their rules, whatever those might be.
Meanwhile Keith was going crazy with the craziness of a Third World
city—the heat, the sickness, the not knowing how to live, how to cook,
how to speak, how to sleep, most of all the people who mocked his great
lumbering T-shirted figure, walking to the comer store to buy a dozen
eggs, carrying a naked, sunburnt baby in the crook of one muscular arm.
I tried to follow, and make him follow, the precept that "the native is
always right." No matter how strange or mean people seemed, I tried to
accept them and make him accept them. We began to quarrel seriously.
I was going crazy myself in a different way, frequently sick, frequently
angry, always searching, following every lead, for what I wasn't quite
sure, and I wondered why I had come to this place, dragging my family
along, in pursuit of what I was beginning to think was a chimera: cultural
form.
Then, slowly, my luck began to change. I met a brilliant shamaness;
I met a slightly dotty but wise old doctor; I met some women who worked
in the doctor's paddy fields; I met the Tamil scholar Themozhiyar. Everything I have learned about Tamil Nadu since then stems from these encounters.
The doctor and Themozhiyar were the ones who interested me most,
at first. The doctor lived in a village at the southern end of Tamil Nadu,
Themozhiyar had spent his whole life in or near Madras, hundreds of
miles from the doctor's home. The doctor was old—past eighty. Themozhiyar was young—not quite forty. The doctor was a Brahman and
identified strongly with the Brahman community; he wore the topknot of
old-fashioned Saiva Brahmans (worshippers of Siva); he was fluent not
only in Tamil but in English, Sanskrit, and Malayalam. Sanskrit is the
language of the great Brahminical texts. In the region where this doctor
lived, Tamil shades into Malayali. Through the languages that he knew,
the doctor was in close contact both with the laborers of his district and
with the savants of the subcontinent. Themozhiyar, in contrast, knew
only Tamil and some Telugu, the language of his ancestors. He had never
learned any English; he said he was frightened of it and of math; he was
also frightened, he said, of people with many degrees. Unlike the doctor,
he did not try to get to know the untouchable laborers of his village; he
feared being changed by them. Thus his knowledge was more circumscribed, and perhaps for this reason more unified, than that of the doctor.
Themozhiyar was of a "high non-Brahman caste" and the feelings he
expressed about Brahmanism were mixed. He had been involved in the
Tamil self-respect movement, which was anti-Brahminical. If The-

10

/

What Led Me to Them

mozhiyar and the doctor, whose name was Mahadeva Iyer, had met, they
would probably have disliked each other, their backgrounds and their
philosophies were so different. So in certain ways, my two prize informants balanced each other nicely.
But the two men had many things in common as well: both were
serious Saivas, both were vegetarians, both were landowners, both were
extremely literate, both were teachers, and both were talkers: they would
both ramble on and on about all kinds of topics and the things they said
were amazing. I couldn't find these things in books. Mahadeva Iyer
talked about medicine, about sickness and its treatment, about cooking,
about his pet bull, about his family, about the mountains that grew behind
his village, about the North Pole, the British administrators, the forest
demons, the magicians and yogis he had known, about the Vedas, the
English and Sanskrit alphabets, about house construction, embryogenesis, the marriages of people and of trees, about cosmic and social forces,
about life in general. He knew the old Sanskrit medical texts well and
often explicated parts of them for me. His explications generally went far
beyond anything the texts themselves said.
Themozhiyar talked about Tamil literature—he had read widely, and
knew many verses by heart, and he believed them, lived them, in much
the same way that Mahadeva Iyer believed in and lived the Sanskrit
medical texts, but with less skepticism and compromise. Themozhiyar
was a kind of fundamentalist when it came to the literature of Tamil
Saivism. He had a religious attitude toward the older, secular literature as
well. He believed (because the old poems said), that the souls of the dead
were visible floating in the empty sky, that a swan could separate milk
from water, that crabs would die if you disturbed them during lovemaking, that bats defecated through their mouths, that if you spat on a chicken
before you brushed your teeth in the morning, the chicken would be
poisoned. It was all rather touching and incredible to see this practical,
educated, city-wise man profess these silly ideas, and sillier ones still,
and chastise me as though I were a foolish child for doubting them. But
the silly merged with the profound. Themozhiyar spoke often of events in
his own life, as a way of illustrating for me passages of literature that I
was trying to learn about. He also drew upon what he called potu arivu,
"common knowledge." Like Mahadeva Iyer's explanations of medical
texts, Themozhiyar's explanations of Tamil texts were in no way determined by the texts themselves, and yet they were continuous with them;
they were something new growing out of the texts, like seedlings out of
the forest floor, whose sources could only be guessed.
The things that Themozhiyar said that I thought of as silly were of

What Led Me to Them

/

11

course only silly to me, with my American-educated, female point of
view, which had its own blind spots. As I listened to Themozhiyar, and
as I listened to Mahadeva Iyer, a pattern emerged in the picture of the
world that each man was drawing for me. The trees, the mountains, the
medicines, the households, and the poems that they spoke of all had
certain distinctive things in common. They all were linked through an
extensive network of metaphors. They all fit a common framework, and
it was one that I had never seen before I came to Tamil Nadu. The large
hard mountains encompassed the fertile paddy land as men guarded their
women. The eyes blossomed, the breasts wept, and the fields breathed
forth their powerful spirits rhythmically. All living hardness softened, all
softness melted, and all fluid substance was sublimated into power, into
spirit, into new life. Hard consonants contained and were animated by the
soft breathy spirit of vowels. The bones of the saint melted with love for
God, releasing his soul to join the invisible, passionate cosmic dancer.
The tough barky tree poured its life forth in the form of a tender fruit,
consummated in ripening, in sweetening, in being consumed as the body
of a ripe woman is softened and loosened and consumed as she pours her
life into others, as a man's member weakens and diminishes as it pours
forth its spirit, its feeling, and fluid seed into a new generation. These
were the forces turning the world in which Mahadeva Iyer and Themozhiyar lived. All the things they said were arranged around these
forces. It had just been a matter of time, of collecting a large enough
number of seemingly unconnected bits of information, before I began to
see the interlocking patterns into which they all fell.
After eighteen months in Tamil Nadu, I returned home and wrote my
dissertation about these patterns, describing in detail an array of the different pieces of information that fit them. A great number of the pieces
had been given me by Themozhiyar. A slightly smaller number had come
from Mahadeva Iyer. The remainder came from scattered sources, the
most important of these sources being Mahadeva Iyer's agricultural laborers, with whom I had spent much time.
I wasn't sure whether my dissertation would be accepted, because it
failed to adhere to many of the conventions of anthropological research
and writing. However, it was interesting and original, it contained a fair
amount of useful information, and it was very coherent: all the pieces fit
together closely. The dissertation passed, and I was told that I should
publish it.
I never did publish it—it is on file at Chicago if anyone wants to see
it—and my reasons for not publishing it were these: first, I felt concerned
that my sources were not broad enough. I knew that many people doing

12

/

What Led Me to Them

anthropology had relied as heavily as I on one or two principal informants. It was not necessarily wrong to do this, as long as you were honest
about it, I felt. A single articulate human being can open many doors, and
there were precedents for such a narrow focus in a number of anthropological classics. What troubled me more was the knowledge that both
Mahadeva Iyer and Themozhiyar were men—high-caste, highly educated, landowning men at that. I did not want to believe that Tamil culture—that any culture—was made only, or even mostly, by such men. I
knew there was something more. In the back of my mind, during all this
time, there remained Alene Dorsey, my black other mother, smart but
denied education, strong but denied political power, loving, segregated.
I do not congratulate myself on this degree of remembrance of Alene. But
at least it was enough to give me pause, to make me think twice about
what these high-caste men, in their beautiful words, were telling me.
Besides Alene, there was another influence: in Tamil Nadu itself there
had been the shamaness. An untouchable woman with no schooling, no
land, no money, many children to support, her husband irregularly employed and earning little, she was astonishingly eloquent and resourceful.
Like my two male informants, she too wove a world with words for me,
but I could not put her into my dissertation because what she told me did
not fit at all with what they said. Nor was it their world turned upside
down: that would have been too easy. It was a completely different set of
visions—tougher, angrier visions, more bitter, more questioning ones. I
learned from her, as well as from Anni and others, how illusory was the
ideal of the soft and yielding, submissive Indian woman.
In subsequent visits to Tamil Nadu—in part, perhaps as penance for
the high-caste masculine bias of my dissertation—I sought out untouchable women, recorded their words, took them seriously, and was greatly
rewarded for doing so, for there are artists and philosophers among them
from whom we have much to learn. My few publications to date are
mainly about these women.
But there are other, less noble, reasons why I backed away from publishing by dissertation.
As the first stint of my field work in Tamil Nadu picked up and became
more exciting and I knew at last the direction in which I was going, things
got worse for Keith. I was spending increasing amounts of time away
from the house, leaving him alone with the baby. He bought wood and
hand tools and constructed a playpen, his body covered with sawdust and
sweat as he labored in the hundred-degree heat of the afternoon. He could
have hired a carpenter to do the job for him, but that was not the point. He
befriended other Americans living in Madras, but he was the only one

What Led Me to Them

/

13

who had no reason of his own to be in India. He spent several afternoons
a week at the American consulate, reading the New York Times. He
began to speak about returning to Chicago.
Often I would go out in the evenings, when social life begins to stir in
Tamil Nadu. The scorching sun drives people into the shade in the afternoon, but as soon as it is gone, the streets fill with men and women, and
businesses reopen. The shamaness held regular healing sessions in the
evenings, and Themozhiyar conducted his temple lectures in the evenings.
In the village of Tiruvanmiyur, at the sourthern end of Madras, there
is an old temple called the Sri Maruntiswaran Koil, "The Temple of the
Lord of Medicine." It was here that I first met Themozhiyar. I had visited
the temple because I was interested in "indigenous medicine," as a set of
activities dealing with life processes. I came there one day to see what I
might find. It was a peaceful place, unlike the temples closer into town
which are filled with frenetic activity. Not much seemed to be going on
here at all. Goats grazed around the temple courtyard. People had started
to build a large stone archway at the entrance to the temple, but it was
never finished. The ocean was nearby, and its breezes kept the air constantly cool. By the temple tank (most temples have these man-made
ponds next to them) there grew a tree with burlap bags hanging from it.
It smelled bad. Someone told me the bags contained placentas.
No one was there at the temple that day, so I wandered around undisturbed. The most striking thing inside it was a large gilded and brightly
painted statue of a being called the Kamadhenu, "The Cow of Desire." It
had the body of a cow, lifting its feet prancingly like a show horse, and
it had the erect and fanned out tail of a peacock. Instead of a cow's head,
it had the head of a woman, with a cherubic face that smiled sweetly with
inviting red lips. A small tiger voluptuously licked the cow's udder.
Also inside the temple was a special sivalingam. The Sivalingam is the
Lord Siva's erect penis. It is to Siva as the cross is to Jesus—his holy
sign, and also a sharp reminder of the essence of his character. Though
veils of prudery sometimes partly mask it, Saivism is a religion of the
erotic; it is an ancient religion that has had time to grow, and its roots go
deep down; its poetry and its iconography plumb the soul.
The sivalingam in this temple was different from most, in that it was
not hand-carved. Instead, it was some kind of natural rock formation,
something like a stalagmite, shaped like a partly melted candle. It was
kept in, or around it had been built, a small dark alcove, illuminated only
by the daylight that filtered in.
Later someone gave me a tiny pamphlet, of the kind that are published

14

/

What Led Me to Them

semianonymously by the tens of thousands in India, explaining the history of the Sri Maruntiswaran Koil. The story was that once the Kamadhenu lived in the forest, and nearby in the same forest was a sivalingam,
which she loved. Every day she would visit it and bathe it in her milk. But
one day an evil hunter, a king, came through the forest and pursued the
Kamadhenu, trying to kill her. She fled, but when she reached the sivalingam, she turned to face her pursuer. Placing her hoof upon the sivalingam for support, she sprang upon the hunter and killed him. Then she
turned again and found that the sivalingam had been crushed by her hoof.
Still, having been enveloped so often in her warm sweet milk, it loved
her, and forgave her for destroying it. That is why even today we may see
this sivalingam, crushed and partly melted, standing in the darkness.
One other thing caught my attention on the first afternoon that I visited
this temple. This was a banner strung between two pillars, announcing
that someone named Pulavar Themozhiyar would lecture at the temple
every Tuesday evening on the topic of a text called Tirumantiram. Tirumantiram, "The Sacred Spell," was one of the books of the Saiva canon
that I had wanted to read. It was supposed to describe the means to
immortalization of the body and along the way it was supposed to describe from its own point of view all the life processes—conception,
birth, growth, death, and the movements of the soul—together with social customs associated with these processes at the time that the book was
written, a thousand years ago. I returned to the temple the following
Tuesday evening to hear the lecture.
Keith came with me, carrying Daniel, so perhaps as a young family we
made an auspicious sight. We found that the temple was almost empty,
but in one of the outer rooms, open to the night, there was a middle-aged
man, seated cross-legged on the floor, speaking in formal tones to a group
of older men seated around him. The speaker had a mahogany-colored
face and body but his teeth were gleaming white and his tongue was pink
as a rose petal. His mouth was the first thing one noticed about him; the
second thing was his voice. Next his hands, then his eyes, then his feet.
Some of the old men gestured to us to come and sit down among them.
I did so. Keith took Daniel and carried him around in the courtyard of the
temple to keep him quiet. The speaker was saying that the body is layered, like a lotus flower. The outer layers are large and tough, the inner
layers are soft and small, the fragrance comes from within the inner
layers. He made the shape of a lotus with one of his hands. His gestures
were fluid. His palms were pink like his tongue. As he spoke, he looked
from one to another of the members of his audience. Periodically, his
eyes paused at mine. His left eye was slightly askew, so that when he

What Led Me to Them

/

15

looked at me, he seemed to be meeting my gaze and avoiding it simultaneously. After he finished speaking he stood up and some of the old men
prostrated themselves before him, touching his feet. They told me to bow
to him too, so I did. His calves were bowed, his toes were rough and
barky and darker than the earth. When I stood up, I saw that he was
shorter than me by about three inches. He left the temple, conversing
companionably with some of the men. I wanted to talk with him but he
would not speak with me or look at me after the lecture. It was about ten
o'clock when Keith and Dan and I got home. I tried to explain to Keith
what had been said in the lecture, but as I wasn't sure myself what it was
all about, I did not do a very good job.
In the following weeks, I returned to the temple by myself, to hear
subsequent lectures. Still, Themozhiyar would not talk with me. Then
one evening one of the old men—his name was Ganesan—asked me
about myself and started up a conversation in that way. He was kind and
friendly, and we ended up chatting for a long time. After a while he asked
me was it true, as all his Mends believed, that Westerners had no rules at
all governing their behavior, that the women could do anything, go with
anyone they wanted any time. I told him no, not at all. He said, that's the
way it seems in the movies. I said, you must know that the movies aren't
true. He said he knew they mixed truth with lies, but all that he and his
friends knew of America was what they saw in the movies. He asked me
why I came to the lectures. I told him I was interested in learning as much
as I could about Tirumantiram. He said, "You know, you're not like our
children; they're not the least interested in these old books."
Ganesan approved of my wanting to leam about Tamil literature, but
he said that I would not be able to cover very much ground at the rate we
were going. At the temple, Themozhiyar expounded upon one verse of
Tirumantiram each week and there were three thousand verses in all. Why
didn't I ask him to come to my home and give me private lessons? I told
Ganesan I didn't think he would come—he seemed rather shy. Ganesan
said, "Of course he will come!" Especially if I paid him. I asked Ganesan,
"Will you arrange it?" A few days later, Themozhiyar appeared at my
house, accompanied by Ganesan and two other male friends. He delivered a formal lecture to all of us, and then left. The next week he came
again, alone, and lectured to me again. Daniel, in the next room, started
crying in the middle of the lecture, and I excused myself to go and nurse
him. Themozhiyar smiled, stretched his legs out in front of him, laid his
head back on his hands and relaxed.
After that he came every week, and the lectures quickly broke down
into question-and-answer sessions, and then into conversations, on every

16

/

What Led Me to Them

topic that he or I could think of. In the great anthropological tradition of
kinship studies, following in the footsteps of the famous Bronislaw Malinowski (author of The Sexual Life of Savages), I felt it was an important
part of my research to leam something about native theories of where
babies come from. Gently, innocently, via the mediation of Tirumantiram, I broached this topic with Themozhiyar. At his request, I had made
a list of all the sections of Tirumantiram that I was especially interested in
reading. One item on this list was a chapter entitled Karu Utpatti ("Embryogenesis"). I had already looked at this chapter and found it rather
benignly obscure. But Themozhiyar's lessons about it to me were something else again. They were subtle, disturbing erotic quasi-poems of his
own creation.
Spring in Tamil Nadu is not what it is here. By March, the fire wind,
as they call it, is blowing strongly. In January or February, I forget
which, Keith had gotten a letter from the school in Chicago where he
taught, asking him to come home and teach there again. He had written
back immediately, "Yes, I'm coming." I found myself telling him angrily, "Go. Just go." Keith, I'm sorry. On March 1, 1976, Keith got on
the plane. Daniel and I stayed on in Tamil Nadu for six more months.
Themozhiyar continued his visits. The time came when he said to me,
"What we're doing is a selfish thing, very selfish." I argued with him, and
won my case, but knew that he was right. At the end of August, on
Daniel's second birthday, we flew home.
INITIATION

Themozhiyar's letters to me were sometimes difficult to decipher. For
instance, he would write long paragraphs expounding on the importance
of what is called in Tamil porul, a word that we translate as "meaning,
substance, thing, important thing, wealth, money." He said there was
drought, the harvest was bad, he wanted to perform charitable acts for
poor children but was unable to do so. I deduced from such letters that he
wanted me to send him money. I was saddened by this, because from my
point of view, friendship was not consistent with begging for gifts. It took
me a long time to understand and accept that from his point of view such
begging meant something quite different. Once in response to a porulletter I wrote back apologizing that, being a student with a very small
income, I did not have enough cash to send him a gift-check that month.
He answered, saying, "You are to be pitied. I thought that you were a
fertile tree. I know now that you are a bald tree."
Often he wrote and spoke in such metaphors. He had told me that this
was the civilized (nakarikamana) way of speaking. For instance, he said,

Plate 2. The Kamadhenu.
if a wife speaks angrily to her husband, the husband should express his
discontent by saying, "There is too much salt in the stew." Of his own
wife Padmini he said, "She is like a jackfruit—tough on the outside,
sweet on the inside." When he was unhappy with Padmini and I asked
him, "What about the jackfruit?" he said, "The jackfruit emits a sweet
sticky fluid that attracts many flies, and traps them." He said I was like the
plaintain. "What are the characteristics of the plantain?" I asked. "It is a
plant that has many uses," he said.
In 1978,1 received a letter from him that seemed to be brimming with
joy. "Something wonderful is about to emerge," he wrote, "like a lotus
from the mud, like a pearl from a shell." A few months later, his son
Jnana Oli was born.
Themozhiyar saw himself as my guru and me as his student. He
wanted me to believe in his god and to follow his path toward that god.
He referred to me as a muraiyillata pond, a "lawless thing," whose life
had no order and followed no rule. Out of pity, he said, he would lift me
up. The ceremony of worship and meditation that he conducted he re-

18

/

What Led Me to Them

ferred to as varipadu, "taking the path." When I was still in Madras, he
had performed initiation (gurudiksha) on me, by surprise and against my
mild protests, by giving me a secret mantra of twenty syllables. I accepted
the role of disciple, as being the most appropriate one under the circumstances, though as I got to know Themozhiyar better I found it increasingly difficult to bow to him, even as a nominal gesture. I argued with him
frequently, as did his other students, but I was probably more vehement
and stubborn than they. I wanted to learn from him, but I also wanted to
be in control of the situation in which the two of us found ourselves. I told
him that he should consider me a child, that in my ignorance of Tamil
culture I was a child, and needed to be taught everything from the foundation up. Themozhiyar agreed to that. I acted as humbly and innocently as
was possible for me. But I did not enjoy being treated as an inferior.
There was one long poem that Themozhiyar wanted me to read. The
name of the poem was Tirukkovaiyar. It was written by the most famous of Tamil Saiva saints, Manikkavacakar. Themozhiyar had been
lecturing about this poem, verse-by-verse, week-by-week, to a group of
his students in Saidapet. He told me that in this poem, the Lord Siva takes
the form of a woman, and the questing soul, uyir, is the man who loves
her. He said that it was a very difficult poem, that few people read it and
most did not understand it because of its complex grammar. I was interested in the part about God being a woman. In Indian devotional literature, it is common for the worshipper to enter into an erotic relationship
with Siva or Vishnu, but in most cases, the worshipper becomes (in his
male imagination) female, the frustrated but faithful mistress of her divine lord, who has a multitude of girlfriends and who generally misses his
dates with all of them. The subordination of human to divine is, in this
literature, analogized with the subordination of wife to husband. The
contrast between the necessary fidelity of the one and the fickle freedom
of the other is notable. Tirukkovaiyar sounded different to me, and better.
If in this poem the oversexed and unruly Lord Siva played the role of a
Tamil woman, he would have, for a change, to toe the line.
For three years, Themozhiyar and I corresponded. To me, our relationship was a meeting of two worlds normally very distant from each other.
I thought that if we could simply learn to understand each other, and
beyond that, if we could learn to work together, to be colleagues and
coequals, to create something together, then we would have achieved a
change in anthropology, a change in the way that civilizations deal with
each other. My visions were very broad and, now I realize, absurdly
grandiose. But they were not unworthy visions. Other people in my field
were also attempting to change "informants" into "colleagues" and simul-

What Led Me to Them

/

19

taneously to change the idea of culture from something fixed to something
dynamic, to realize that culture, whatever it is, is constantly being created
and recreated among people who are different from each other, even as
different from each other as Themozhiyar and I. My mentors in America
encouraged me to continue learning from Themozhiyar and working with
him on joint projects. The idea of building a bridge between two great
human civilizations obsessed me. For years my life revolved around this
dream.
This dream and one other, totally opposite one: to get away from
human beings as much as possible, to live with my small family back in
the woods, to need little money, to be undisturbing of the world, and
undisturbed. After all this time of being an anthropologist, I still believed
more in Nature than in Culture. Life in India had fanned the flame of my
belief from both sides. While I was there I was never able to be alone with
just the trees and the birds; people and their intensity were everywhere;
moreover, they crowded around me, following me and keeping close tabs
on me wherever I went. I longed more than ever for the cool wild woods
of my home, for solitude. At the same time I saw that in India, Nature had
not been so much conquered and paved over as it is here. This force that
Tamils call iyatkai, "that which is as it is," made cracks in everything
human-constructed and sent its tendrils through. People had no choice but
to live with it, so they did. The materials of their lives were mostly just
what was at hand. A coconut shell and a stick made a ladle, mud and grass
made a house. Every object of possible use was recycled many times. To
people in Tamil Nadu who lived this way, making do was a stark necessity. To me, it was an admirable skill. In my final months in Madras, I
learned to eat less and less until I was never hungry at all, wore the same
old clothes until they were rags, and felt quite blissfully happy. I must
have been quite a sight when I got back home. You can live on nothing
in India, because so many people have to. In America, no one will let
you. But for a while I tried.
In 1979, I received a small summer grant to work on translating Tirukkovaiyar. I was intending to go to India to do it, but early in the
spring, Keith and I decided to buy a piece of abandoned farmland out in
the country near where we worked and build our own house on it. So I
used the grant to bring Themozhiyar here.
Themozhiyar had little sense of the world beyond Tamil Nadu. When
I picked him up at Kennedy airport and drove him the three hundred miles
via Route 17 back to central New York State, he watched the vast
stretches of forestland rolling by and finally asked suspiciously, "Where
are all the people? Where are all the cattle?" In the late afternoon, in a

20

/

What Led Me to Them

heavy cold rain, we arrived at our home—a battered old twenty-foot
trailer in the middle of a field of weeds. Keith, Dan, and I had just moved
in ten days before. We were planning to build our house near the trailer.
Themozhiyar looked around at the weeds in despair. "There's not even a
path," he said.
For him it must have been a paradoxical situation indeed. We owned
a car—a possession that only the wealthiest of Tamil people could boast
of—and yet we had no house. We owned twenty fertile acres, a considerable holding by Tamil standards, and yet we had left it all in wild trees and
goldenrod. He asked me if cattle would eat goldenrod. I said I didn't
know. He asked me what maples were good for. Firewood or lumber, I
said, but we planned to leave the healthy trees standing. "You must cut it
all down," he commanded. "Plant mango trees." Mangoes won't grow in
this part of the country, I told him. "Plant apple trees, then. What a
terrible waste this is." I told him it would be a big job to cut down twenty
acres of secondary growth and hardwood, plow it, and plant it. Keith and
I had neither the skill nor the time nor the energy nor the tools to do this.
"Get laborers to do it," he said. "Where are your laborers?" I told him we
had none. In this country we could not afford to pay even one person to
work for us.
He kept saying over and over again, "This country is not like Tamil
Nadu. The trees are different, not a single tree is the same. The sky is
different. The people are different." We lived in the midst of such opulence, oru valamana nadu, "a rich country" he called it often, looking out
on the wanton deep green of the summer woods. And we had such nice
white skin. He said he knew if he stayed here long enough, his skin would
get paler too. And yet our customs were so barbaric. Even the milk, he
said, tasted like blood.
I thought he might like to try a vegetarian pizza. But when I brought
home the box and opened it, his eyes widened with horror. "It looks like
a corpse," he said, "With the pus and the blood oozing out." I said, "You
know it's not that. The white is cheese, made out of milk. You drink
milk. And the red is tomatoes. Your wife at home cooks with tomatoes all
the time." He said, "Yes, but she doesn't mix it all up and display it and
make it beautiful [arakupaduttamaddahka] like you do." Beauty and
death are an ancient association in Tamil Nadu.
Both Keith and I kept trying to educate Themozhiyar. We wanted to
show him the good things about ourselves and our country. But he refused to be educated. He had not come for that. He had come to educate
us. He had come as my guru. Tamil knowledge was the best of all knowledge, he said, and he, Themozhiyar, already knew everything there was

What Led Me to Them

/

21

to know. I protested, "Ayya, there are many things you don't know. For
instance, you don't know English." "I have all the necessary knowledge
[tevaiyana arivu]," he said. "All the rest nobody needs."
Themozhiyar's ignorance of English had consequences not only for
him but for us, on many levels. For one thing, it meant that he was unable
to communicate directly with anyone but me during his stay in America.
If he wanted to speak, he had always to do it through me. I learned the
powers of an interpreter, then, and was glad I had never had one in India.
The temptation to edit the things people said to each other was sometimes
very great. I wanted to protect Themozhiyar from the contempt of my
friends. Once, for instance, he wanted to tell a professorial friend of mine
that he admired Adolph Hitler. But what did he know of Adolph Hitler?
That name meant something completely different to him than it did to us.
Did he know about the holocaust? No. And how many times had I embarrassed my Tamil associates by saying ignorant things to relative strangers
when I was in the field? How many times would they have covered up for
me if they had been able?
The worst thing was that Themozhiyar couldn't talk with Keith. During the three months that he was living with us in the trailer, the two of
them could only communicate with each other through gestures and facial
expressions. When I talked with one, the other felt left out and angry.
How could he know what was being said? We might be talking about him
in front of his face, we might be mocking him, and he wouldn't know it.
A silent bond of suffering grew between them and both of them grew
more critical of me as the summer progressed. Why had I created this
situation? Keith was building our house single-handedly. Often he
needed help. Themozhiyar and I did assist him whenever we could but it
wasn't enough. I should have been up there helping all the time. The
summer was growing short. Themozhiyar was there to explicate the poem
to me. He had a job to do, for which he was being paid, for which he had
been brought halfway around the world. He seemed to feel a heavy
weight of responsibility. At the rate of five stanzas a day for ninety days
we could get through the poem. Each stanza took between one and two
hours. The house also had to be livable by fall. The trailer was on loan and
had to be returned. The conflict was impossible, and there was no way
that Themozhiyar and Keith could work things out directly between themselves.
Finally, Themozhiyar's not knowing either my language or my culture
even to the extent that I knew his meant that true collaboration between
us of the kind I dreamed of would always be impossible. He did all the
teaching. I did all the learning. I had great power over him because he

22

/

What Led Me to Them

didn't know my world and didn't want to know it. I think now that the
possibility of such power was just what attracted me to him in the first
place. To me he was the perfect informant. His knowledge of his own
"traditional" culture was tremendous, and he did wonderful things with
this knowledge: he could make his own thoughts out of it, and he could
convey these thoughts in words to me, in such a way that hidden connections could be seen and flashes of recognition would occur. He made his
culture alive, he was one of the cells on the meristem, he was one of the
builders. At the same time, he was "pure," he was remarkably free of
"Western influence." He could not anticipate my responses to what he
said, because he was unfamiliar with the medium in which my mind had
grown, and so he could not defend himself against me. If he intended to
show himself to me at all (at least this much was his choice), he would
have to show himself to me as he would to one of his own people. To me
as a wilderness-seeking anthropologist, he was virgin territory.
I know the implications of all this now. I do not like them. But I don't
believe that they render what I learned from Themozhiyar or about him
false. I also don't believe that there was any better way that I might have
proceeded. Should I not have tried to learn about a person from another
culture? Should I have objectified him more? Treated him as a piece of
data? Should I have kept him at a distance because he was male and I was
female? Would I have learned as much if I had done so? Would I have
cared as much about what happened to him and his family afterwards?
Every day Themozhiyar and I sat down in the grass underneath a
young walnut tree that had grown from the richly manured ruins of an old
barn, I with my pen and paper and tape recorder, Themozhiyar with his
voice, and there he sang the poem to me verse by verse, explained it to me
and lectured about it to me, daily for three months, often for eight hours
a day, until he was hoarse and tired. Alongside his chanting and his
lectures he provided a simple Tamil definition of each word in the poem
and a careful explanation of the meaning, or meanings, of each verse as
he read it. If the absence of English in our conversations crippled us in
one way, it freed us (and especially me) in another, by forcing me to think
in Tamil, rather than trying to translate everything into English before I
understood it.
The poem Tirukkovaiyar is about love between two strangers, a man
and a woman, from two different lands. It is also about the abstract
universal unbounded creative divine force Themozhiyar called civam
(whence the name of Lord Siva, civaperuman, derives) and its love for
the bounded soul of a human being. In order to love this finite soul, be
loved by it and free it, civam enters into a finite form, the form of the

What Led Me to Them

/

23

guru. Thus the poem is also about the love between guru and disciple,
how each travels a long way and changes very much in order to meet the
other, how each, out of love, causes pain to the other, how each, out of
love, endures this pain. As Themozhiyar taught the poem to me, it also
became a poem about the two of us.
THE PROCESS OF EMBODIMENT

I have said that one theme of this book is the way that India both exceeds
and shatters our Western expectations. A second theme of this book is the
fluid relationship between ideal and experience in India, within and
among Indian minds. By "ideal" I mean high-level mental creations:
myths, philosophies, sciences, songs, poems, and the like—those
ratified aspects of culture for which India is famous. By "experience" I
mean what happens to ordinary Indian people in their day-to-day lives, on
the ground, in the mud. Ideal and experience are my own categories—our
own categories—but perhaps as long as we realize that they stand for
realities that are in fact inseparable, we will not go too far astray. In India
they are related to each other as food and spirit, feeling and flesh: they are
constantly being transformed one into the other.
Similar relations have been discussed by Indologists before, under the
rubric of Great and Little Tradition, Text and Context.2 The Great Tradition was the world of Sanskrit written texts, by means of which the literati
throughout South Asia communicated with each other, by means of
which they created the rules, the high ideals, that they thought all people
should follow. The Little Tradition was the mass of village praxis and
local lore, all the unwritten (or largely unwritten) "manners, customs, and
ceremonies" by means of which ordinary people ordered their lives, the
multiplicity of contexts in which the rules of the texts might or might not
be more or less enacted.
Central to the anthropological studies that produced the labels Great
and Little was the understanding that in India, ideas and ideals are not
Platonic. They are neither changeless nor inviolable, sacred though they
may be. Rules stand in a cyclic relation to praxis, as the high does to the
low, as the Great does to the Little, as the ideal does to the real. Each is
constantly turning into the other and changing it.
Thus in India great ideas have no self-existence. Great texts are like
spirits out of bodies—they need flesh, matter, circumstantiality, to give
them shape, to make them real. And so they take a thousand forms, and
every form is real. Also they have no self-existence in that they are not
unique. Great stories, great images, great ideas turn up again and again in

24

/

What Led Me to Them

many different places. Great texts are anthologies, compilations, collections. The greatest of the Indian epics, the Mahabharata, is like a forest
all of whose species grow elsewhere, and there are even whole other
forests like it. Likewise Tirukkovaiyar, "The Holy Flower-Chain," the
poem/story/myth that Themozhiyar taught to me, is a collection of images
and phrases many if not all of which are found elsewhere in Tamil literature. It is a daisy chain, and the fields are full of daisies.
It is true in a very concrete sense to say that great texts are like spirits
out of bodies, for in India, people live these texts. Myths, for instance,
which tell the stories of gods, folktales which tell the stories of heroes and
heroines, poems and songs which tell the stories of anonymous lovers,
and finally, nowadays, movies which tell the stories of modern human
beings—people in India take these as more than entertainment, they take
them to heart, so that a person's life may become an enactment of a story
and vice versa. Heroes and gods are persons who live;3 their spirits exist
and come down into living bodies, not at random. There is a complex
relationship, and a partial identity, between the personality of a possessing spirit and the personality of the possessed. During trance, there may
be a complete merger between the person's experienced life, and the
storied life of the spirit, but even outside of such set apart mental states,
some degree of identification remains between a living person and a beloved hero, deity, or story.
This being so, when you are trying to understand a story told in India
it becomes important to consider the life of the person telling the story,
and when you are trying to understand a person it becomes important to
listen to the stories that that person tells. It is also important to recognize
the ways in which one may lead to alterations in the interpretation or
enactment of the other. The story may change to fit the life; the life may
change to fit the story.
Performance of a text both embodies it and pluralizes it. Performance
pluralizes a text both by fragmenting it into different forms and merging
it with different contexts, and by putting the different voices the text
contains into actual different people. For myths, poems, stories, and so
forth, if they involve one personality, usually involve more than one. If
they are enacted, they are dramatized and have multiple actors. When a
drama is on a stage, it is usually fairly clear who are the actors and who
is the audience, and in what direction the bulk of the messages are traveling. When a drama is carried out as part of real life, then these boundaries
become blurred.
In an anthropological situation, the ethnographer, willing or not, must
form part of the context of performance, part of the audience, and some-

What Led Me to Them

/

25

times, part of the act. Especially in intensive, face-to-face studies of small
groups of people, this must be true. A firsthand anthropological study
then becomes, deliberately or not, a study of intercultural communication, and a study of cultural change. For every performance of a story,
every living of it, changes the script, and when personalities of different
cultures get involved in such a drama, it becomes especially interesting to
see what things change, and what things remain the same.
Tirukkovaiyar is a story about relationships between personalities
that can be played out between real people. In playing it out with me,
perhaps Themozhiyar was performing his own ethnographic experiment,
trying to find out for himself how truly universal are the sentiments expressed in this work which he held sacred. But he was also just doing his
normal job as a teacher. In all of his lectures to all of his classes, Themozhiyar took it as his task to demonstrate the oneness of the sacred
literature (which was a kind of esoteric lore) with what he called varkkai,
"life," represented by nonesoteric folklore, what he called potu arivu,
"common knowledge." His students therefore bestowed upon him the
title vaiyiyal pulavar which means something like, "professor of the nature of life." Life, he said, was an expansion or opening up (virivu) of the
text; the text was a condensation or gathering up (tokuppu) of life. Hence
it was his specific goal to bring his and his listeners' experience into
congruence with the text that he taught, and vice versa. Inasmuch as all
experience is concrete and unique, his exegesis of the text was unique.
But the tradition he followed, of fleshing out an ideal by giving it his own
life form, was one shared by people throughout Tamil Nadu.

THE SAME OLD STORY

The earliest Tamil poetry, written about two thousand years ago, is of two
kinds: poetry of the interior (akam), and poetry of the exterior (puram).
Akam poetry is love poetry. Puram poetry is about the warlike exploits
of kings. Tirukkovaiyar, written about a thousand years ago, merges
these two genres, describing simultaneously the love between a man and
a woman, and the terrifying mythic exploits of the Lord Siva—how he
skinned an elephant, how he broke the teeth of the sun, how his town is
heavily fortified and frequented by tigers. The link between these two
worlds is made by means of metaphor and metonymy: the heroine is said
to be like, or to be from, the fortified town of Siva, called Tillai (after a
flower that grows there) or Puliyur (tiger town) or Cittampalam (the small
space, the meeting ground, the space of consciousness inside the heart).
This city is the holy city, but it is also hard to reach, armed and danger-

26

/

What Led Me to Them

ous—like the heroine herself, whose eyes and breasts and lower body
parts are frequently called "weapons." The link between beauty, especially sexual beauty, and death is a very important component of this
poem.
Some specialists in early Tamil literature say that the early Tamils
considered women to harbor a very dangerous, sacred power that had to
be kept circumscribed in order to be useful and nondestructive to men.
Poems like Tirukkovaiyar keep seeming to say that a woman's sexuality
can kill. This of course is only one-quarter of the full circle: only a man's
point of view and only the dark side of that. The bright side is that a sexy
woman has the power not only to feel but to give heavenly bliss, and
having this power, she commands respect.
Akam poetry all follows a certain pattern. The two strangers, boy and
girl, meet in a wild but beautiful place, the forested mountainside. There
they engage in clandestine union and for a brief time all is ecstasy—
mingled with some fear. Hardship comes when the heroine (talaivi), who
is always very young, just barely blossomed, leaves behind her family to
elope with the hero (talaivan). The heroine's girlfriend (tori), who
shares all her feelings and secrets, laments her going, as does the heroine's mother and the tori's mother, the heroine's foster mother (cevili
tay). After eloping with her, the hero leaves the heroine alone to go off
and perform his worldly exploits, while she waits anxiously. He is a long
time in returning, and she fears that he may not return at all. At some
point along the line, they wed (the formal wedding is never described in
this poetry), and she bears a child. The hero then begins to visit other
women. In some poems, the other woman (parattaiyil) speaks, and then
it becomes quite clear that to the ancient Tamil poets, this woman-out-ofbounds is neither a sorceress nor a villainess, but simply a human female
with human feelings. She is sad and embittered because she feels used by
the hero; she knows that his first loyalities are to his family, and that he
is not hers to keep. Meanwhile the wife, the heroine, almost sympathetic
to the other woman, toughly endures her husband's infidelity, making a
few sharp comments along the way.
In the early akam poetry, each poem describes one scene in this family
drama, as seen through the eyes of one of its participants: the hero, the
heroine, the heroine's mother, her girlfriend, her foster mother, the
hero's companion, the other woman. Tirukkovaiyar strings four hundred of such vignettes together, to form a whole saga, fitting the pattern
described above.
In both Tirukkovaiyar and its earlier prototypes, the sexual sentiments and images are quite graphic and unrestrained, and yet they are

What Led Me to Them

/

27

subtle, because they are never expressed directly but always through
metaphor. Sometimes the metaphors are obvious, even to the Western
reader; other times they are not. The honey-filled, curly hair of the heroine is often mentioned, but the notion of pubic hair is never directly
stated, only strongly implied. The young heroine admires the color and
vigor of her lover's genital equipment, but in her admiring poem, she
doesn't point to his body; instead she points to a certain flower that
springs up on the mountainside where he comes from, the kurinci that
has "such black stalks." The lonely abandoned wife defiantly tells her
disloyal husband that she doesn't need his presence to satisfy her: she can
be quite happy thinking about him and masturbating—but she doesn't say
it in just this way. Rather she compares herself to her little boy playing
with and pulling on his toy chariot, happy in his fantasy that it is the real
thing. In this way, many aspects of human sexual sentiment are hidden in
Tamil poetry, waiting still for readers to uncover them. The fact that these
sentiments are expressed in a "civilized" way, so that we can never know
for sure, when we read a given poem, that this or that exactly is what is
meant, only increases the erotic intensity of this ancient art form.
WHAT THEY SAID

Out by the weed field near our trailer, Themozhiyar commenced his explication of Tirukkôvaiyâr to me. We worked outside whenever the sun
was shining. The twelve-year-old girl who lived next door babysat for
Dan, who now was four, while we did the poem, and Keith labored on the
house a hundred feet away. During that summer, we read through verse
307. Themozhiyar chose to stop there, on an odd number. To stop on a
round number (say, 300) would have been inauspicious, he said. Below
are a few of the verses that we read, together with some (polished and
tidied up) excerpts from the notes that I took while he lectured.
2. Ayyam (Doubt)
pôtô vicumpô punalo panika latupatiyô
yàtô arikuva têtu mariti yamanvidutta
tûtô anankan tunaiyô inaiyili tollaittillai
màtô madamayi lôvena ninravar vârpatiyë
[In a flower? In the sky? In the water?
In a snake's hole? Where?
Harder than anything to know
is the dwelling-place of this soul-grabbing
death's messenger, this helper of the killing,
beautiful, sickness of desire,

28

/

What Led Me to Them

this lady of the matchless, ancient city of the Lord,
this innocent bird of bright plumage, or whatever
in the world it is that stands before me now.]
The poem begins with a man's terror of a woman whom he suddenly
sees when he is out hunting. She is beautiful and she seems like part of the
wild forest to him. He does not know how to categorize her. He does not
know what she is or where she comes from. She seems to be grabbing his
soul, she has great power, so she must come from the heavenly city, or
perhaps she is dragging him off to his death.
But her power over him is only the power of his own desire for her.
When he is able to see that she is "just a woman" he is able to relax . . . somewhat.
3. Telital (Clarification)
payum vidaiyaran tillaiyan nalpadaik kannimaikkum
toyum nilattadi tumalar vadum tuyarameyti
ayum manane anankallal amma mulaicumantu
teyum marunkur perumpanait tolic cirunutale
[Like the fortress of Siva, the springing bull-king,
her eyes are armed! But they blink, and her feet
are dampened in the soil,
and those flowers she wears will die.
Oh my poor, pained, searching mind! She's no god!
Just a small-browed, broad-shouldered little girl,
whose waist bends under the burden
of those big motherly breasts.]
Able to recognize that this creature is, after all, human, and that her
anomalous appearance is just that of a child recently turned woman, and
seeing that she has troubles of her own, in the form of that very body that
so awes him, the man loses his terror.
5. Udkol (Taking Inside)
aniyum amirtumen naviyum ayavan rillaiccinta
maniyumpa rarari yamarai yonadi varttalarin
piniyum atarku maruntum pirarap piraraminnum
paniyum puraimarun kurperun toli padaikkankale
[Perfect beauty, sweet, sweet god-food,
my breath and soul is he
who is the heart-crystal, he
who is hidden, whom the gods
do not know,
by whose origin
the unblessed sicken. Like that sickness, and

What Led Me to Them

/

29

like its healing are the weapon-bright eyes
of this broad-shouldered girl, whose small belly is a
snake
or a lightning bolt, (lashing, and again
flashing.]
"As a snake spreads its hood in anger," comments Themozhiyar, "the
heroine spreads the place at the lower end of her snake-like waist in
desire." [I recall that Madhavi, the beautiful twelve-year-old courtesan in
the Tamil epic Cilappatikaram, is said to have a pubis like a cobra's
hood.] "When she does this," he continues, "a brief strong feeling like
lightning comes again and again."
"God does three kinds of work," he dictates to me. "first, he is an
ornament [ani—"perfect beauty"]. An ornament gives light and beauty to
those who wear it, but it stands apart.
"Second, he is amirtam ["god food," the nectar of immortality, the
essence of life, a sweet distillate of all the bodily fluids]. Amirtam issues
from the soul like a spring and causes a feeling of flourishing to blossom.
The crown of the head is the place from which amirtam flows. He gives
us this feeling by being close to us. That is why it is called amirtam [amir,
"be immersed, plunge, sink, drown"; more conventional scholars would
say that Tamil amirtam is from Sanskrit amrta, "deathless"].
"Third, he is the breath [avi, "spirit"], the feeling within feeling.
Causing feeling to mount he is one with us and fulfills us.
"This lord who is three shines as light in the place called Tillai and
gives us all. The gods are unable to know him. Hiding, he shines. Those
who do not worship his feet are immersed in great sorrow. In the same
way, it is said of the girl who has wide shoulders and a narrow, snake-like
waist, that one look of her eyes gives great pain and another look heals
that pain."
6. Teyvattai Makirtal (Rejoicing at What God Has Done)
valaipayil klrkada ninrida melkadal vannukattin
tulaivari nerkari kottenat tillaittol lonkayilaik
kilaivayin nikkiyik kendaiyan kanniyaik kondutanta
vilaivaiyal lalviya vennaya venteyva mikkanave
[As though a stake planted upright in the eastern sea
where coiled conches live
found a wide yoke floating from the western sea
and pierced it like a needle,
something broke this girl, with her fish-like eyes
from her kind on the mountain of the ancient one
and brought her here to me.

30

/

What Led Me to Them

But for that act of fate, I wonder at nothing,
hope for nothing, have no other god.]
For Tamils, the "eastern sea" would be the Bay of Bengal, which
borders Tamil Nadu itself, and the "western sea" would be the Arabian
Ocean which borders the mountainous Malabar coast. The two seas meet
in the Indian Ocean to the south. In Tamil, mèi means both "high" (in
all senses) and "west," while klr means both "low" and "east," because
the western part of southern India is mountainous while the eastern and
central parts are relatively low and flat. In earlier times, mélnàdu, "westem country, high country," referred to Kerala and Karnataka. Nowadays
it refers to Europe and America.
In this poem, the heroine comes from a "high" place because she is the
guru, the form of god come down to rescue the soul (or alternatively,
because she is a wild mountain girl while he is a civilized, lowlands king).
Hence Themozhiyar comments, assuming the voice of the talaivan, the
hero, who speaks this verse: "The stake planted in the ocean is my pride.
I am lost in the ocean of rebirth because of it. The guru in the form of the
heroine [talaivi] comes and accepts me [èrrukkondatu] like a yoke upon
a stake. This is the fruit of my good deeds in the past."
Themozhiyar continues on the subject of eyes: "The heroine has 'fishlike eyes,' or eyes like those of a fish. A fish does not sleep. It does not
sit on the eggs that it lays. By means of its sight \pàrvai], by gazing at the
eggs, it causes them to break and the baby fish to hatch out. The guru,
civam, by means of its sight, gives every kind of good to the soul. It
causes the soul to blossom. This is the strength [vallamai] of the guru's
sight."
15. Idamanittukkuri Vatpuruttal (Comforting by
Describing the Places)
varunkunra monrurit tonrillai yampala vanmalayattu
irunkunra vana rilankodi yéyida reytalemmùrp
parunkunra màlikai nunkala pattoli pàyanummurk
karunkunram vennirak kancuka mèykkun kanankuraiyè
[Listen, tender vine living on the dark mountain
of the one who skinned the mountainous
elephant—don't be sad,
for the light will shine off the limestone palace
of our home mountain, and flow onto the blackness
of your home mountain, and make it white.]
A mythic theme is evoked here which is present also in one of the
songs sung by the untouchable agricultural laborers in Themozhiyar's

What Led Me to Them

/

31

village. In this song, a dialogue between two lovers, each says to the
other, "You come from a black rock mountain; your mother's house is
made of black rock." The song ends with the confession, "You and I are
a matched pair; we are both from the house of black people." Another
aspect of the same theme appears in a famous story about a dispute between Siva and his wife Parvati.4 Siva mocks Parvati by telling her,
"Your body against my body is like a black snake coiled around a white
tree." Parvati, offended at this slur against her color, goes off to do
austerities and acquire a golden skin for herself.
South Indians take skin color very seriously. In marriage arrangements, it tends to override all other considerations of beauty. A bride is
supposed to be paler in color than her husband. If a young woman is very
dark, even if she is very attractive, talented, smart, and good-natured, she
may have trouble finding a marriage partner. The problem has been aggravated (or perhaps created) by the hierarchical social relation obtaining
between South Indians, who are mostly quite brown, and North Indians,
who are somewhat paler. Pale color is just one of the marks of superiority
that northerners hold against southerners. The color sensitivity of South
Indians has been further aggravated by the presence in India of British and
other Europeans, who are both more powerful and whiter than "the natives," and who often bring their racist attitudes to India and spread them
around there. Finally, people who labor every day outdoors in the sun of
course become darker in color than people who don't, and since physical
labor indicates absence of wealth and low social status in India, a sunburned skin is a marker of that low status.
On the mythic level, the black-white contrast is a symbol of the malefemale contrast, the purity of Siva and the fertility of Sakti. Siva is white
(Siva's name means "red," but red means pale and fair to Tamils when
they are speaking of skin.) The precious male sexual fluid that Siva has in
abundance and frequently spills on the earth is white. The lightning, the
fire, and the beam from the eyes with which he is often associated are
white. The ashes with which he covers himself are white. Siva's consort,
the goddess Sakti, in many of her forms is black. Many of the "village
goddesses" (carnivorous, spurned by Brahmans, powerful but ambiguous
as to status) who are wedded to Siva are black. The earth with which they
are associated is black. While Siva harbors fire, they control the rain.
Against Siva's red, they like to wear green.
This verse of Tirukkovaiyar is about the male's whiteness flowing
onto the female's darkness. Each one's "home mountain" could be each
one's body, because people's bodies are thought to be made from and
matched to the substances of their homes, and because the pubis is like a

32

/

What Led Me to Them

mountain. The whiteness flowing could be the sexual fluid that passes
between them.
Themozhiyar's explication of this verse to me said, "Here the heroine
is sorrowing because the hero has to leave her. The hero tries to comfort
her by pointing out how close their homes are to each other: 'You see that
house like a mountain painted white—it is so close to your town that your
town, the black mountain of Kailasa [Siva's home], is white from the
reflection. Therefore, don't be sad; we live close to each other.' He is
saying that his home is so glorious and hers so humble that hers will be
blessed merely by the reflection of his. But by calling her home black and
his home white, he only makes things worse. The heroine's sorrow will
increase.
"The heroine [talaivai] is an emanation of god [civakuru]. Is it possible, then, for her to mourn? Does God feel sorrow?
"When you raise something yourself, and you must part with it, of
course you feel sorrow. A mother feels sorrow on parting with her child,
even though her love is smaller than God's—she gives milk to lessen her
own pain. To be cared for in her age, she gives what is asked. God gives
without asking—we did not ask for eyes or nose or world or soul or
flowers or trees—he just gave them. When we fail, will he not weep?
Without question, he will weep."
19. Pankanai ninaital (Remembering his Friend)
punkanai yarpunar renpuli yurpurin tampalattul
ankenai yandukondadum piranadit tamaraikke
pankanai yananna panpanaik kandip paricuraittal
Inkenai yartadup parmadap pavaiyai yeytatarke
[In the heart's meeting place,
in the wise town of tigers,
with its bright crying flower-crowded water,
there the one close to me took me
dancing with his lotus-like feet.
Having found such a friend,
if I tell him what's been given,
who can keep me from getting
this simple little doll?]
Here the hero recalls his male companion, whom he likens to Siva,
because the friend is as close to him as Siva, who enslaved him
(andukondan) in an ecstatic love in a heavenly place. The hero feels
that his companion, who is his partner in this great, prior love, will surely

What Led Me to Them

/

33

be able to help him carry off the lesser affair he is trying to have with a
woman.
22. Karariyuraittal (Speaking Abusively)
ulamam vakainammai yuyyavan tanducen rumparuyyak
kalamam vidamamir takkiya tillaittol lonkayilai
valamam potumparin vancittu ninrorvaii cimmarunkul
ilaman viritten rovinrem mannal irankiyate
[The ancient one of Tillai
turned poison to ambrosia in his throat,
freeing the gods. He frees us as befits our hearts,
by coming and enslaving us, then leaving us.
On his mountain in a fertile garden pit
there lurks a vine-waisted girl
staring out with deery eyes.
Why does our great king
condescend to love her?]
There is considerable male-female antagonism in this poem. Not only
do the hero and the heroine cause each other endless grief, but the hero's
male friend (pahkan) and the heroine's female friend (tori) each do everything they can to keep the two lovers apart. These same friends also are
supposed to act as helpers and go-betweens for the lovers. Here the hero's
male companion is angry with the hero for falling in love with a woman
and tells him that her female charms are just a dirty low trap. He is trying
to keep the hero on his side.
The reference to Siva "enslaving us then leaving us" perhaps picks up
on the motif of the previous stanza, in which the love between the two
men is likened to the blissful encounter between god and devotee. Is the
companion accusing the hero of loving him and leaving him as Siva does
to the soul?
The reference to Siva turning "poison to ambrosia in his throat" has to
do with a Sanskrit myth in which the primal ocean was churned by the
gods and one of the products of its churning was a poison, which Siva
swallowed in order to save the gods from its destruction. Another product
of the churned ocean was amirtam, the sweet liquid nectar of the gods,
which bestows immortality upon them. This poem has Siva turning the
poison into amirtam in his throat. The allusion to this particular act of
Siva's seems unconnected to the rest of the poem unless we realize that in
Tamil thought, amirtam is considered to be a transformation of semen,
which also holds a man's life essence. Tamil Siddha yogis are believed to

34

/

What Led Me to Them

bring their semen up into their heads and to carry out this transformation
of semen to amirtam at a place behind their throats. They feed only on this
amirtam created by their own bodies and dripping into their throats, in a
kind of eternal narcissistic cycle. As long as they keep themselves to
themselves in this way, they will remain deathless. In this verse of Tirukkóvaiyár about homosexual love, mention of amirtam (read semen) in the
throat is apt.
125. Tórivantuküdal (The Girlfriend Unites with Her)
ponnanai yánrillaip poñkara vampun cadaimidainta
minnanai yánarul mevalar ponmel viralvarunta
mennanai yáimari yépari yélveri yármalarkal
innana yánkonarn tenmanan tárkurar keyvana
[Like losers of the grace
of the lightning man who wears
in his soft hair frothing snakes,
the golden one of Tillai,
don't let your gentle fingers long
for a soft bud, deer-like one, don't pick it,
when I have brought these scented flowers,
suited to your fragrant hair.]
Here the girlfriend of the heroine beseeches the heroine to stay with her
and not to go yearning after the hero. The "frothing snakes" in the "soft
hair" of the "lightning man" all of course evoke male sexuality, which the
girlfriend is warning the heroine to avoid. In Tamil idiom, the flower is
a symbol of the vagina; the bud is a symbol of the penis. In previous
verses, the hero has repeatedly attempted to offer a gift to the heroine—
first a leaf, then a leaf bud, then a flower bud—but each gift is refused by
the mediating girlfriend. In this stanza the girlfriend is telling the heroine
that the flowers she brings are more appropriate to the heroine's own
female nature than is the kind of gift the hero has to offer, or in other
words, it is better for a woman to love another woman than it is for her to
love a man.
Themozhiyar comments briefly:
"There is a custom in Tamil Nadu for a family to wait until late at night
to eat, lest a guest should come. If the family eats early and goes to bed,
the guest may come and go away hungry, or sleep on the doorstep hungry. Here the heroine Civam, having fed one guest, is waiting for another
to come. She is about to pick a flower bud when her girlfriend Tiruvarul
["Holy Grace"] comes and tells her, 'I have brought blossomed flowers,

What Led Me to Them

/

35

what do you need that bud for?' The blossomed flowers are ripened souls;
the closed bud is an unripened soul."
126. Adidam pukutal (Entering the Dancing Place)
arukal niraimalar aimpal niraiyanin tenaniyar
turukan malarttottut tokaitol layamel lappukuka
cirukal marunkul varunta vakaimika encirattin
urukal pirarkkari yonpuli yuranna onnutale
[I have placed many blossoms in your five-parted hair
full of bees. O peacock-girl, now
you're a thick bunch of flowers! So come back gently
into your old home.
Here your body's small middle place
will not be so hurt.
For you are like the tiger town, o bright-browed one,
of the being who is hard for others to gain, whose feet
lie upon my head.]
Again the girlfriend entreats the heroine to stay with her, to dance and
play like she used to with her childhood friends, to remember the pleasures they used to give each other, to not assume the burdens and pain of
adult man-woman love.
100. Kulamuraikuri Manittal (Refusing Because of the
Customs of the Families)
tenkam parankamu kinkulai cadik katalicerruk
konkam paranat tolirkulir naddinai niyumaikur
parikam palavan parankunrir kunranna mapataippac
cinkan tiritaru cirurc cirumiyen temoriye
[Fierce one you belong to a cool bright land where
the coconut falls on the betel nut
and crushes the bananas
and the honey fills the field.
But our sweet-talking little girl lives
in a dark wild town where
the lion hunts the terrified elephant
on the mountain of our half-woman lord.]
Here the girlfriend of the heroine speaks to the hero, trying to convince
him to give up his love for her, because their backgrounds are different
and they are not suited to each other.
Themozhiyar, assuming the voice of the girlfriend, paraphrased her
speech:

36

/

What Led Me to Them

"You who are the soul [anma] live within a world whose boundaries
are the pleasures of the senses. The heroine lives in a place beyond the
pleasures of the senses. The place where she lives is a high place. The
place where you live is a low place. To think that you can leave a low
place and go to a high place is not in any way appropriate.
"The trees are all maya [illusion, deception, magic]. The coconuts,
betel, and bananas are all pleasures. The soil on which the honey and
fragrance of those pleasures flow is the heart, the rejoicing in it is the
light, the coolness is the bliss. You come from that land.
"Our Civam whom we call the sweet-talker [temori] lives in the small
town called cittamparam [the meeting ground, the small space, the space
within the heart where Siva dances his cosmic dance]. In that town wanders the lion of God who causes the beasts of the senses to tremble. The
town is on the high mountain where the Lord of the Meeting Ground
[ampalavari] lives, who has the mother [ammai] as one half of himself."
"Many things are upside down in this poem," Themozhiyar concluded. "Here on the surface it is being said that his situation is better than
hers—he lives in a land flowing with honey, she lives in a land where
elephants and tigers wander. But beneath the surface we see that he lives
in a land of illusion, she lives in a land frightening to him, a difficult land
free of illusion, high in the mountains."
As Themozhiyar lectured me thus, a number of thoughts ran through
my mind. I thought about how his name, temori, "sweet-talker," enters
this poem (The English spelling of his name that he himself used, "Themozhiyar," came from the mode of transcription used by British missionaries and linguists in the nineteenth century.). Themozhiyar had gotten
this nickname as a child and it had stuck, but it is normally an epithet for
girls, as the poem shows. I thought about him playing the role of the guru,
Civam, who is a girl, the heroine in this poem, and about how he had told
me that really he was a female at heart, who had been born as a male just
in order to be able to go out in the world and teach. I thought about the
contrasts between my dwelling-place and his. He had written home to his
children that he was living on the edge of a huge terrifying wild forest. All
of his land back home was civilized and cultivated. It was dry, too, and
not many trees at all grew there. And it was flat. He thought of the hilly
region where we lived as "mountainous." I thought about how embarrassingly rich we were compared to him. We could have anything at all we
wanted to eat, any time—all the milk, all the honey, all the almonds (he
loved almonds), all the butter, all the fruit, all the rice—anything. He was
very impressed by this, and yet he was very angry when he learned we
had no little mud deity to guard the boundaries of our garden, no planting

What Led Me to Them

/

37

rituals, no astrology, nothing like that at all. "You people live for nothing
but pleasure!" he exclaimed once in a fury.
But pleasure wasn't evil in his eyes. He was always telling me that
Civam was feeling, feeling was all. Finally we came to the last verse we
would read together that summer. It was about love, about how no one
person, not even God, can find joy alone. Perhaps it was also about how
no one heart can know completely what the truth is, for truth like love is
boundless and can never be embraced by one person alone.
307. Kalaviyinpankural (Speaking the Sweetness of
Mingling)
ananta vellat taruntumo raruyir Irurukkon
dananta vellat tidaittilait talokkum ampalancer
ananta vellat taraikara ldnarul perravarin
ananta vellamvar ratumur rativ vaninalame
[As though one full soul, drowning in a sea of bliss,
became two, and there in the endless sea danced,
like those with the grace
of the lord of the meeting place,
that will never dry up and will never reach its end,
our sea of bliss is this shining love.]
AMBIGUITY

"The gods hate what is obvious," says a very old Indian proverb. "The
gods love what is obscure." In India the sacred is obscure because it is
beyond the capacity of any one mind to know it fully. It is intrinsically
and paradoxically out of reach, both beyond and within. (Tamils say their
word for "God," kadavul, is from kada, "cross over," and ul, "be inside.") By definition and by its very nature, the sacred is both far away
and hidden. The gods are buried deep in the darkness of their temples,
and even there, what can be seen by dim flamelight is only the form, a
temporary, finite reality. The spirit itself is hidden within this form, and
it can never be seen directly, it is always invisible. By definition what can
be seen is form, are forms, bodies (rupa, uruvam). What unifies the many
forms, what lies within them, is, by definition, unable to be seen.
In its essential nature, the Indian sacred is formless and one, but in the
bounded world of the senses it is always formed and many. The forms it
takes are not ordinary forms, being changeable, contradictory, not as they
appear.
South Asian deities, therefore, are not consistent. Each has a dual
nature; each is split. In Sri Lankan Buddhism the king of the demons

38

/

What Led Me to Them

Mara is the mirror image and cross-cousin of Buddha the king of the
gods. As cross-cousins, Buddha and Mara are affines. They are welded
together as male and female. They need each other. When Mara is conquered he is not expelled from the kingdom of the Buddha (as the devil is
expelled from the Christian God's heaven), rather he is enfolded within it.5
The Hindu gods, Siva and Vishnu, the light one and the dark one, like
Buddha and Mara are rivals and afiines: in South Indian myth, Siva is the
husband of Vishnu's sister. Siva even begets a child upon Vishnu him/
herself. Not long ago the worshippers of Vishnu and Siva fought each
other. Each was evil to the other. The more they fought, the more they
became alike.6
Vishnu in his form as Krishna dwells together with his mistress Radha
in the one body of the Bengali saint Caitanya. In the body of the saint, the
male and female halves of divinity are merged, yet somehow they remain
two, not one, so that they may continue to enjoy the pleasure of their
differences.
Siva, whose sign is the phallus, is said to be half female. In his form
as Ardhanariswaran, his body is split down the middle, woman on the
left, man on the right. He is the king of ascetics—men who give up all
physical pleasures and keep their sexual power within themselves. He is
also king of philanderers; he makes love to his yogini wife as well as to
many others not out of any sense of duty or altruism but for the sake of
pleasure only; the heat of his desire is a terror to all around. The ashes on
his body represent both self-mortification and self-gratification. Like the
sun he is eternally burning himself out.7
Within himself, the Sri Lankan Buddha is also dual, both vital and
burnt to ashes, like Siva. The remains of his cremated mortal body, his
hair, teeth, and bones, are kept within monuments called stupa. In form,
a stupa is shaped like a sivalingam. The Buddha's remains are called
datu, which means "semen" or "seed." The Buddha was a renouncer of
desire, but his seed bestows fertility on the land all around.8
The great goddess of Hinduism, too, is split. As Gowri she is golden;
as Kali she is black. As Mari and Sitala, she is rain and she is the cool one,
but her body is burning and her thirst unquenchable and she makes the
bodies of others burn with pox diseases.9 In many of her stories she
undergoes a sudden change, from murderous to benevolent, from horrible to beautiful, or the other way round. In her person are combined the
purest and the most defiled of states. Mari has the head of a Brahman and
the body of an untouchable. She is married both to a base "low-status"
demon and to Siva.10 Draupadi has five potent husbands and yet she is a

What Led Me to Them

/

39

virgin.11 The divine female has a crude and rampant sexual appetite, and
with it a powerful thirst for blood, and yet she is perfectly self-controlled,
chaste, and anorexic.
Though male deities in South Asia are not considered (by Western
scholars) to exemplify the qualities of man as male, female deities are
thought to stand in some direct way for woman as female. (This view
should be reexamined, but for now I will let it be.) It is said that women
themselves are sacred, in a way that men are not, and therefore women
themselves are split and ambiguous, as goddesses are. Unbound, they are
the source of all destruction; bound, they are the source of all blessings.12
Their milk is the purest of foods, their menstrual blood (from which their
milk is thought to be made) is the vilest of poisons.13 As sisters they are
altruistic friends and sacred protectors, as wives they are dangerous potential destroyers.14 As virgins and daughters they are bearers of deadly
weapons and they are gifts fit only for divine receivers.15 As wives of a
god (devadasis) they are whores.16 As mothers, they are the goddess
herself, desired and forbidden, life-giving and killing.17
To some Tamil men, woman stands for the whole experience of life
itself. "Life," varkkai, is only married life, life with a woman (or, if
you are a woman, with a man). The wife is samsara, "the one who goes
around with you," the world of the senses. Sexual pleasure is inpam,
"sweetness," something you taste. Marriage is manam, a word that means
both "union" and "fragrance." Sexual fluid is intiriyam, "sensation." To
make love to a woman is to "experience" her (anupavikka).
The experience of life itself, the multiplicity of finite sensations given
by the body, is the most general form assumed by the hidden, infinite
sacred. The experience of life itself, maya, is ambiguous for this
reason. Dreams, theater, fiction, myth, and other kinds of experience that
Westerners think of as "not real" are not completely bounded off from
ordinary life in India. If something bad must happen in a play or a ritual,
special precautions must be taken to keep the event out of ordinary life;
the actor who plays a murderer or a villain, for instance, must pray that
his role and his acts be confined to the stage.18 Ritual theatre, as for
instance, the demon exorcism ceremonial in Sri Lanka, involves people
pretending to be creatures they are not, and yet what happens in the
ceremony is real, it is not pretend.19 Play-acting fades into spirit possession, in which mythic personalities become active in everyday life. The
personalities of possessing spirits fade into the personalities of the possessed. When a shaman or shamaness is sitting on the porch speaking to
you, the voice of a spirit may suddenly break in; it is not always clear who
is acting, who is speaking, in the body of someone in regular contact with

40

/

What Led Me to Them

a god. Philosophers discuss and storytellers write about how easily
dreaming can be mistaken for waking, how impossible it is to know for
sure, when you move from one world to another, whether you are waking
up or falling asleep.20 In present-day villages, gods and ancestors speak
to living people in dreams. Through such channels, all the different levels
of being flow into each other.
Is it any wonder, then, that South Asians are reported by Western
observers to enjoy generating multiple interpretations of everyday
events,21 to apply different standards of behavior to different contexts,22
to avoid giving absolute answers to simple questions,23 to accept contradictions in their world without trying to resolve them,24 to treat reality as
a vast jigsaw puzzle with most of the pieces lost?25
If one wishes to give a form to the infinite sacred, whether this form is
of myths, or of mud, or of one's own living person, one must create
something ambiguous. Words are a very good medium from which to
construct such a form. All kinds of complex ambiguities can be built out
of words. I think it is just for this reason that Tamils pour so much of
themselves into words, so much of their religious expression into poetry.
One striking feature of Tamil poetry is the high degree of ambiguity
contained within it. Poems are set up in such a way that they are subject
to a variety of discrepant interpretations. Of course many kinds of verbal
art in many languages are characterized by ambiguity of this sort. Sanskrit
is famous for it. Many scholars have noted the layer upon layer of diverse
interpretation piled upon Sanskrit texts, especially those texts presenting
themselves as condensations of some much wider body of knowledge
subsequently lost. I do not know whether it has ever been suggested that
the authors of these highly condensed sutras and samhitas intended for
their work to be interpreted in many ways. Certainly in other Sanskrit
genres, especially in satirical works and in the kinds of courtly poetry
whose aim was to display the poet's virtuosity at verbal game-playing, the
intentionality of the ambiguity is clear.26
In Tamil poetry intentional ambiguity takes the form of a set of wellestablished (but for the most part, unnamed) conventions. Many (though
not all) of these conventions are shared with Sanskrit.27 For instance,
often what might be called phantom words or phrases appear—formulaic
phrases that would cause the reader or listener automatically to think of
some particular referent, but which in the context of the poem, must mean
something else: tivinai, "evil karma" may have to be read as "the work
of fire"; manratte nampi, "believing in the meeting place (of Siva)" may
have to be read as "our younger brother (left) the plaza." In verse 3 of
Tirukkovaiyar, there appears the phrase amma mulai. Amma means

What Led Me to Them

/

41

"mother," mulai means "breast." But if we interpret ammamulai in the
context of verse 3 to mean "mother's breast"—the first interpretation that
would come to anyone's mind—we run into some trouble, because the
referent of the phrase in this context is the breast of the heroine, who is not
a mother, and certainly not the mother of the speaker, the hero. We could
get around the problem, as I have done in my translation, by interpreting
the phrase to mean "motherly breasts." Themozhiyar went even further
by interpreting ammamulai in this context as am-md mulai, "those big
breasts," thus evading completely the mother-son desire overtones that
this phrase, in a poem about sexual love, evokes.
The highly condensed and elliptical quality of much Tamil poetry,
including Tirukkovaiyar, inclines it to ambiguity. We think we are hearing one thing and find we are hearing another. Surprising counterpoints
in the language become revealed, displaying the tensions upon which
people who think in that language subsist. Relations that ordinarily remain convert and uncognized, become overt and known. The hidden
formless in this way takes a form and "comes out."
A THEORY

Indian society is very old, wide, and diverse. It is truly hard to know
whether there is anything that holds it all together. There are some institutions that are quite widespread on the subcontinent: the worship of certain
deities, with certain stories told about them; the organization of each local
populace into castes; the ranking of castes from high to low. It has been
said that a certain concept of the sacred unites Hindu India, a notion of the
sacred as all, as whole. 28 1 have tried to suggest here that ambiguity is
intrinsic to Hindu concepts of the sacred, and that like the sacred, ambiguity is not confined to a small piece of the Hindu world, but pervades it
all, from speech to sexuality, from dreaming to blood. If it is at all
legitimate to think of "Indian culture" as an organic whole, a system that
can be modeled and described as such, then ambiguity must be a key
component of that whole, a key feature of the communicative system by
which that whole is maintained. If the creation of hierarchy is one way of
pulling plural ways of life and plural ways of seeing into a unit while still
keeping them plural, then surely the use of ambiguous communicative
forms is another, less oppressive, and more free-spirited way of doing the
same thing.
But perhaps this vision, also, is too grandiose. If so, then we may drop
to a lower level, but still remain somewhat abstract, and focus not on
intentional ambiguity itself as something that happens often in India and

42

/

What Led Me to Them

takes peculiarly Indian forms. Intentional ambiguity in Indian life is a
third major theme of this book.29
Intentional ambiguity, of the Indian variety, is more than just anomaly
or unclassifiable otherness, more than something ouside the structure that
has somehow to be dealt with, more than just an ad hoc way of getting
from one category to another, and more than the kind of once-a-year
chaos that is needed to keep some orders well-defined. Intentional ambiguity is not interstitial ambiguity, marginal, liminal ambiguity characteristic of what is dismaying or strange to people, but ambiguity at the heart
of things, openly embraced where it is found, emphasized where it is hard
to perceive, and created where it could not otherwise exist.
Intentional ambiguity may occur in many communicative media, on
many levels of analysis. In a word or a simple part of an utterance it may
take the form of polysemy sharpened by context, rather than resolved by
it, or of two or more mutually exclusive interpretations for the word, both
or all of which are plausible (or even indicated by the speaker to be
intended) within the context of a given utterance, each of which would
cast the whole utterance in a different direction, cause it to yield different
consequences. Intentional ambiguity in a complex utterance may take the
form of opposition between two "figures" perceivable in the utterance, or
between two or more possible, mutually exclusive, interpretations of the
utterance, both or all of them fitting, in some way, the act or scene in
which they are embedded, but each of them constraining in a different
way the possibilities for interpretation of the act or scene in which they are
embedded. Where alternative figures present themselves within a single
form, there may be no indication in the figures themselves or in their
surroundings as to which figure is to be allowed or disallowed. Intentional
ambiguity in an act may involve the simultaneous keying, or cluing in, of
mutually exclusive interpretive frames for the act, or the discrepancy
between possible intentions of the act. In a text, intentional ambiguity
may involve the merger of previously distinct voices, or sudden disharmony among voices that previously were thought to be one. In an image
it may appear as an alternation of gestalts, or as mutual accommodation
among contrasting images occupying a single "mental space" (as in an
Escher drawing). In a person, intentional ambiguity may be displayed as
warring personalities within the person, or as discrepant presentations of
self. This list, of course, by no means exhausts the possibilities.
THE FAMILY

In 1980, I returned to India to finish reading Tirukkovaiyar with Themozhiyar and at the same time to try and do a general study of forms of

Plate 3.

S. R. Themozhiyar.

ambiguity in Tamil. I was inspired to do this partly by what I had seen of
Tamil poetry, including Tirukkovaiyar, with all its hidden metaphors,
its plays on words, its layers of meaning, its mergers of different worlds,
its many interpretations. Partly I was inspired by modem Western literature on Indian culture, in which the ambiguity of the sacred in India, and
the centrality of the sacred to all of life there, are two strong and recurrent
themes. Partly I was inspired by what I had learned from Themozhiyar
and my other Tamil friends, for whom double entendre, irony, and various other forms of indirection seemed to be a preferred way of communicating. My plan was to consider both written and spoken materials, with
an eye to ambiguities, and see if any regularities emerged. For "spoken
materials" I hoped to tape-record natural conversations, or failing this, to
keep my ears open all the time and write down when I could as much as
I remembered.
Keith decided not to come with me on this trip. He wanted to stay
home and continue work on the house and the garden. He was angry with
me for going. I didn't blame him. But I wished he would come. Daniel,
approaching his sixth birthday, did come. Arriving in India with Dan, I
felt alone, helpless, and worried. I did not even know how to manage an
Indian kitchen yet. I did not know what I was going to do with Dan while
I worked.

Plate 4. Left: Offerings
to the sun; below:
Sivamani

Plate 4. Above: A
friendly buffalo; right:
the kitchen

46

/

What Led Me to Them

But when I disembarked at the Madras airport, there stood Themozhiyar and all his family, with big smiles on their faces. They took Dan
in hand, they carried our luggage on their heads, they led us to a bus stop,
and we all loaded on a bus that went to their village. Before I knew what
was happening, Dan and I were living there.
For a while, Dan and I stayed in a separate little house across a wide
lakebed from the village. Themozhiyar had built the little house with
money I had given him. He called it his madam, his monastic retreat. He
had named it Aruljnanapperuveli, "The Great Space of Divine Wisdom."
The family called it Peruveli, "the great space," for short. Sometimes
they called it "the temple." Themozhiyar was also building a rice mill and
a concrete threshing ground. He believed that these would provide a
steady income for his family. A well had been dug and a gasolinepowered pump had been installed nearby. The pump was used to water a
vegetable garden, a quarter-acre paddy field, and a stand of small banana
trees that had all been recently planted. Much of this had been done with
the money I had given him, that he had saved. My contribution had
totalled about $2500.
Themozhiyar lived with his wife, his wife's sister, her husband, all
their children, and various other relatives. The house where they all lived,
together with about twenty acres of paddy land adjacent to the village,
belonged to the wife's sister's husband. Themozhiyar owned just the four
acres he had bought recently, with the buildings he had put on it.
While Themozhiyar and I worked in the retreat during the days, reading Tirukkovaiyar, Daniel stayed in the family house, playing with the
four children his age. When these children went to the village school, the
women of the house kept Dan entertained, looking after him as they
looked after their babies and toddlers. At night, Dan slept with me in the
retreat. Themozhiyar's wife and her sister brought us our meals when we
were there. Otherwise, we ate with them in the main house. The women
quickly ascertained our favorite foods—yogurt, butter, and fruit—expensive foods, and provided these and a variety of delicious meals for us
in enormous abundance. Their generosity was embarrassing. Daniel
grew. I put on ten pounds. All of our needs and more were met. When I
went to Madras and returned home late at night, someone would be
waiting for me at the bus stop, flashlight in hand. Countless batteries and
cassettes were obtained for my tape recorder. A taxi was procured once
at 2 A.M. for an emergency medical run to the city fifty miles away. A
tricycle was bought for Dan to ride on; the concrete tank by the well was
filled regularly for him to swim in. When people came to stare at me, they
were driven away.

Plate 5. Annan instructs Jnana Oli to fold his hands in greeting.
More impressive to me still was the way this high-caste family responded when I became interested in their field laborers, who were untouchable to them, and invited them into Themozhiyar's religious retreat,
where I was staying, so that I could record their songs. They did not raise
any objections, though I knew that of their own accord they would never
have let untouchables near their sacred Peruveji. Moreover, they gave us
privacy, leaving me alone with the singers because they said "they will
sing more freely that way." Which was true, for many of the songs were
sung against them. They helped me find more singers, and they helped me
transcribe the songs, and they did a fair and accurate job.
At first, I spent most of my time in the retreat, but as the days wore on,
I found myself more and more with the family in the main house. They
were interesting people; they were relaxed in my presence; I was lonely.

48

/

What Led Me to Them

The focus of my attention gradually shifted from the poem to the household. There it was easy for me to observe ordinary conversation on an
everyday basis. As I lived with them, and became personally involved
with them, unconsciously (as it seems to me now) the focus of my attention shifted. I came to see that Themozhiyar's textual exegeses were
hooked into the everyday affairs of his family—his life in the family gave
the ancient poetry the meaning it had for him. When I saw him in the
context of his family, he seemed much more like an ordinary human
being to me, and the sacred poetic realm into which he had occasionally
lifted me came down out of the stratosphere. This sacred realm was not
profaned, though, and I was not disillusioned. For I learned that in the
everyday life of the members of this household, and especially for Themozhiyar and his sister-in-law who formed its emotional center, the principle of love, anpu, was not just a high ideal, it was the way they lived.
Many of their acts were explained by them, or could be understood by
me, only in terms of this principle. Anpu was sacred to them: it was their
highest value; it pervaded every part of their lives; it gave these lives their
meaning. And as I was trying to understand the uses of ambiguity in the
poem and in the household, it struck me more and more that the most
ambiguous thing of all was this anpu.
The members of this household were not Themozhiyar's natal family.
He had joined them when he married one of their members. Since he had
run away in his childhood, he had no other home. The head of the family
was a man whom Themozhiyar called Annan (annan, "older brother").
His wife was addressed by everyone as Anni (anni, "older brother's
wife"). Anni's father's sister, who was also Annan's mother, remained in
the household but was old and crippled and no longer had any real power
there. Anni's younger sister, Padmini, was Themozhiyar's wife. Mohana
also spent much time in this household. She was the cross-cousin of Anni
and Padmini and was married to one of their brothers. Anni had an
eighteen-year-old daughter, an eight-year-old daughter, and a six-yearold son. Padmini had an eight-year-old daughter, a six-year-old daughter,
and a two-year-old son. Mohana had a two-year-old son.
Although they were landlords, this family was poor, having barely
enough money to keep their children nourished. I bought them a cow and
helped them complete the rice mill, and perhaps it was for the sake of
money that they tolerated me as they did, though they themselves would
deny this vehemently. As impoverished landlords, they were not at all
uncommon. The cost of rice was fixed, laborers demanded higher wages,
crops often failed, they faced litigation on all sides. Many middle-class
families were better off than this one; many more were worse off. There

What Led Me to Them

/

49

were tensions within this family, as there are in virtually any large family.
Disputes sometimes occurred over serious economic questions, but I
never observed any quarrels over allocation of resources within the
household, and I am inclined to think, as Anni did, that friction among
people living together was an inevitable part of life.
How representative of Tamil families in general was Themozhiyar's
family? This question haunted me. I could see that in the view of Tamils
themselves, there was nothing especially surprising about this family's
behavior, certainly nothing pathological. They were actively involved in
a wide social network and they had many friends from the city and from
villages who came into the house and participated in household affairs.
None of the kinds of behavior I describe in this book were kept hidden
from view. All of them, including the quarrels, were accepted as natural
by people who dropped in. Still, I myself wondered, and many colleagues
back home asked, whether Themozhiyar and his family were not more
idiosyncratic than most, since many of the things they did contradicted
what earlier ethnographic reports from South India had led me, for one,
to expect.
For this reason, in 19841 went back to Tamil Nadu to "observe" other
families and live with them, as I had lived with Themozhiyar's family. I
hoped in this way to get a better sense of what was truly unusual about
Themozhiyar's family, as well as of what was common. I stayed this time
in a village near Madurai, several hundred miles from where Themozhiyar's family lived. But in this village I was not able to establish
with anyone the degree of intimacy I had achieved with Themozhiyar's
family. So I contented myself with interviewing a relatively large number
of people in the village and in the city for relatively brief periods (about
an hour per person) on the topic of family relations. The interviews were
open-ended. The content of these interviews supplements at some points
in this volume what I learned from Themozhiyar's family. A hundred of
the 150 interviewees were from the one village. The rest were from the
cities of Madras and Madurai. The preponderance of interviewees were
Paraiyars, Kallars, and Gounders. The remainder were Acaris, Chettiars,
Vellalars, Nayakars, Brahmans, and Muslims. Although there was considerable variation among these different interviewees, for the most part
they confirmed what I saw in Themozhiyar's household. Every basic
expression of anpu that I saw in his family I also observed among many
other families. Paradoxical behavior was often explained in terms of the
feeling of anpu. The assertions I make in the following pages about Tamil
love would be considered by most Tamils to be banalities—too obvious
to be worth writing a book about. Only Americans seem to need convincing.

50

/

What Led Me to Them

METHODOLOGY

My open-ended but prearranged interviews with relative strangers were,
as I have just indicated, carried out in the absence of chances to do better
enthnography. The better ethnography was the kind I carried out in Themozhiyar's household. I never formally interviewed anyone there.
I suspected when I commenced fieldwork, and I became more convinced as I went along, that structured interviews when used as a means
of understanding culture are unreliable tools at best. There is nothing to
prevent respondents from lying, from saying the opposite of what they
believe, and they will lie at exactly the most crucial moments: important
truths are too valuable to be handed out to just anybody. There may be
"paralinguistic" messages—tone of voice, facial expression—openly
telling us, "This is a lie." But how are we, as outsiders, to pick them up?
How inscribe them on our tape recorders or questionnaires? Beside the
"problem" of lying, there are, to obstruct the interview's achievement of
its aim, the well-known "problems" of the leading question, of informants trying to tell you what you want to hear, of the context-sensitivity
of people's behavior, verbal or otherwise. To many people, the informational content of what they say is not nearly as important as the personal
relationship they establish in saying it. And this relationship is established
largely through indirection, hidden messages, subtle responses to context. Finally there is the problem that the interview question, coming as
it does from out of the blue and far away, runs the danger, even on a
purely semantic-informational level, of missing its target completely. For
instance, if one wants to know whether Tamil speakers believe, as Americans are said to, in the idea of "blood kinship," one might ask one's
respondents, "Do different groups differ as to the content of their blood?"
To this question, one will receive a negative answer. "All blood is one,"
people will say. One might conclude that for Tamils, blood is not implicated in ideas of kinship. Yet throughout the Tamil-speaking world, the
term ratta pacam, "blood bond," is used to describe and explain the
feeling of attachment that exists between close kin (for example, Question: "Why are you so concerned about how badly your brother was
injured?" Answer: "Ratta pacam") Unless an ethnographer were incredibly lucky, he or she would not think to phrase a question in terms of ratta
pacam, unless he or she had already heard that term used elsewhere.
Finally one has to admit that one is not in control, especially not in
exclusive control, of the research project, or of the kind of knowledge one
receives during the project's course. Learning a culture, like learning a
language, is largely an unconscious process, which means precisely that

What Led Me to Them

51

one cannot control it. Plain waiting, listening, and hoping seem to be the
most useful things one can do, most of the time.
So I waited, listened, and hoped. In Themozhiyar's household, I did
not use my tape recorder. I tried a few times, but the family would not
stand for it. I attempted to record in writing as accurately as I could what
I heard and saw, but usually I had to wait until I was alone to write down
what I had observed. Any anthropologist undertaking participantobservation experiences this difficulty. Because I was not able to use my
tape recorder for natural conversations, the quotations from Themozhiyar's family that I included in my notes, and subsequently have
used in this book, are not precise, having been filtered through my memory, usually after a lapse of several hours or days. Some Tamil phrases
jumped out at me when I heard them. These are included, in Tamil, in the
text.
Most of the things that I saw happen or heard said, happened or were
said spontaneously, and not in response to any maneuvering or "elicitation" on my part. I did ask many questions, but they were usually about
specific events that I did not understand.
For the most part, I have not attempted to hide the specificity of my
experience under blanket generalizations. I have, however, taken the
liberty of referring to the work of other writers on India and of bringing
in my own observations made outside the context of Themozhiyar's family, when they seemed relevant. The chapter on kinship goes most far
afield in this respect, attempting to relate the very local and personal
experiences of individuals to much broader, general patterns. Much of the
information I have drawn upon that comes from outside of Themozhiyar's family also did not result from systematic interviews, but was
caught, as it were, on the wing. When in the following chapters I organize
my notes in such a way as to show the reader patterns I have perceived,
there will be a patchwork effect, for in many places I have simply put
together numbers of separate observations which I consider in retrospect
to belong to the same category, to express the same or related ideas or
values. What these patterns reflect is something fabricated jointly by
Themozhiyar's family and me, what I feel I learned as a consequence of
certain experiences that they, often deliberately, put me through. This
book is a residue of those experiences. Inasmuch as I have tried to make
sense of what I learned, there are some loose ends bridged by my common sense, and there are some leaps of faith. At these junctures, the
reader will have to decide for himself whether to trust these bridges,
and/or whether to jump with me.
As my emotional involvement with Themozhiyar's family intensified,

52

/

What Led Me to Them

my life with them (and theirs with me) got rockier rather than easier. I
often quarreled with them. I couldn't help it: they themselves were fighters. Sometimes it seemed to me that they were needlessly hurting themselves and each other, and I found it impossible then to keep my mouth
shut. The women, though they took good care of me, saw me more as a
rival then an ally. I was—I could not help being—an intrusion in their
lives. The hardest part for all of us was that we grew attached to each
other's children. When I left, so blinded had I become by my own emotions that I asked the women if I could take their children back to America
with me. I offered them all the benefits of American affluence. There
would be frequent back and forth visits. The children's own mothers
would always remain the children's own mothers.
The refusal of my offer was gentle but very firm. The women asked if
they could keep my Dan with them.
Shortly before Daniel and I returned to America, Themozhiyar and I
completed our study of Tirukkdvaiyar. Again, we did not end on a
round number, but stopped at the second-to-last verse of the poem. Themozhiyar steadfastly refused to read the last verse to me.
In this second-to-last verse the heroine, now a mother, speaks her
mind. True to poetic formula, the hero has betrayed the heroine by making her a mother and then deserting her to court another woman. The
other woman stops by the heroine's house one day. The heroine tells the
hero what happened.
399. Parattaiyaikkandamaikuripulattal (Lamenting after
Having Met the Other Woman)
ayura vaynam akankadaik kanduvan deruruddum
vaiyuru vadkan maravait taruvamar runmakane
meyyura vamitun nille varukena velkic cenral
kaiyuru manmari yonpuli yuranna karikaiye
[A lady came,
meek as the deer our lord holds in his hand,
fearsome as the tigers that frequent his town.
Wondering, she saw our wide doorstep, then
she embraced our child rolling his strong chariot, our
child with his spear-bright eyes.
But she hid her face and fled when I told her
"This is your son, truly as of your own body.
Enter, for this is your home."]

CHAPTER TWO

Generations

THE PAST
" . . . her feet are dampened in the soil

..."
Tirukkovaiyar, 3.

Kanakkamma was born around 1920 in the rocky dryland village of Malaiyanur in eastern Tamil Nadu. With her were born two older sisters, one
younger brother, and a younger sister. At the age of ten she married, left
her home village, and moved into the house where I met her half a century
later. There were forty people in the household when she married, she
told me, "all eating from the same pot," and her husband's family had
been in the same house for forty generations. They were Reddiars, whose
ancestral home was in the north, in Andhra Pradesh. (Andhra Pradesh is
the southernmost of the three "pradeshes." Its name is Sanskrit and means
Land of the South, but it is north to Tamil Nadu, which is a Tamil name
meaning Tamil Land. Previously Tamil Nadu was called Madras State,
after the British administrative center, the city of Madras, which was
located within that state. Now Tamil Nadu, at least in name, is its own
point of reference, to the pride of some but the dismay of others.)
Kanakkamma remembered kindly the past authority of both British
and Brahmans. The place where she lived now, Tamil Nadu, was not, to
her mind, her real home; the language she spoke was not her real language. However, even Kanakkamma did not know how long ago her
people and her husband's people had left Andhra and come further south.
Reddiars had long been one of the wealthier castes in eastern Tamil Nadu.
They counted among their members many large landholders, and they
were the "dominant" caste in many villages in the Chingleput area, where
Kanakkamma lived. Members of other castes depended upon the patronage of Reddiars for their survival.
53

Figure 1.

Cast of Characters

Anni—"Older Brother's Wife." Tough, kind, aggressive, thoughtful,
articulate, self-deprecating, sharp-tongued. About forty years old,
runs the household. Innovative, faithful, proud. Takes orders from no
one. Sometimes gets her way through martyrdom. Tall, well-built,
graceful, casual. Deep-set eyes, leathery skin, heavy mouth, battered
hands. Most devoted friend of her sister's husband, Ayya.
Annan—"Older Brother." Anni's husband. About fifty. Owner and
manager of the family property, has a law degree. Tall, thin, slightly
stooped, unsure of himself, easily persuaded, not a talker, enjoys caring for the small children. Strong sense of responsibility, inclined to
formality, believes in principles, reads religious texts. Smiling, eager
to please. Sometimes loses his temper.
Padmini—"Lotus-born." Anni's younger sister, about thirty years
old. Married to Ayya. Tall as Anni, extremely thin, loud voiced, given
to frequent, violent outbursts of anger. Passionate, fun-loving, sensual, rebellious, needing to prove herself. Proud, hard-working, never
admits to suffering, physically very weak. Inseparable from her
cousin, Mohana.
Ayya (Themozhiyar)—"Lord." Husband of Padmini. About forty.
Much shorter than Padmini, stout and barrel-chested, bow-legged,
balding, dark-skinned, tender black eyes, radiant smile. Charismatic
Saiva guru, brilliant speaker, insightful explicator of religious texts,
synthesizer. Has been writing poems since childhood, all kept. Streetwise, responsible, level-headed. Vain, silly, stubborn, pompous. Believes he is a saint. Leader of a group of Madras businessmen who
have been friends since boyhood. Hard worker, good interviewer,
good tailor, sews all the women's clothing. Frequently weeps, enters
trance daily. Slowly building a financial base for his family.
Mohana—"Enchantress." Orphaned cross-cousin of Anni and Padmini, married to one of their brothers. About thirty years old. Tall,
very slender, dark-skinned. Fun-loving, rebellious, devoted to Padmini. Not confident, mistreated by her in-laws, dependent for her survival on the continued friendship of her female cousins. Artistic, has
learned to sew from Ayya.
Tambu—"Little Brother." Brother of Anni and Padmini, husband of
Mohana. Tall, dark, lean, seems like a friendly guy. Rarely visits the
house. Ostracized from the family for drinking, smoking, not getting
a job, not taking care of Mohana.

Figure 1.

Cast of Characters (continued)

Attai—"Father's Sister." Father's sister and mother-in-law of Anni.
Mother of Annan. Adopted and raised Padmini and Mohana. In her
seventies now, heavy, crippled, losing eyesight and hearing. Kind and
patient, neglected, resigned. Most enjoys conversation and reading.
Taught herself to read when she was a child.
Paddi—"Grandmother." Mother's mother to Anni and Padmini. In
her eighties. Toothless but still spry.
Porutcelvi—"Woman of Substance." Younger sister of Ayya, school
teacher, lives in Madras with her only daughter. Husband in the merchant marine, rarely home. Articulate, literate, independent. Intensely
dislikes Padmini, adores Ayya.
Anuradha—Eighteen-year-old daughter of Anni. Pretty, quiet, helpful, always smiling, college-educated. First child of her generation
bom in this household.
Mangaiyarkkaraci—"Queen of Ladies." Saucy eight-year-old daughter of Anni. Smart. Often gets in fights.
Arivaraci—"Queen of Knowledge." Eight-year-old daughter of Padmini. Quiet, good, self-deprecating, easily frightened, frequently ill.
Umapathi—"Lord ofUma" (a name of Siva). Six-year-old son of Anni.
Oldest male child in the family. Very proud, rough and tough, competitive, likes to mock and tease. Tries never to ciy, but does not always
succeed. Often criticized by the adults. Staunch friend of Daniel.
Arulmori—"Language of Grace." Six-year-old daughter of Padmini.
Cheerful, pretty, confident, self-sufficient. A fluent reciter of poetry.
Jnana Oli—"Light of Wisdom." Two-year-old son of Ayya and Padmini.
Angelic face, pellucid speech, everybody's darling, knows he's a charmer,
absolutely self-assured.
Sivamani— "Jewel of Siva." Two-year-old son of Mohana. Cute and dimpled, the family fall-guy, not neglected but not quite taken seriously.
Swollen belly.
Vishvanathan—"Lord of All." Twenty-year-old distant cousin of Anni
and Padmini. Lives with this family as a quasi-servant, running errands,
doing easy tasks. Scornful of education as well as of physical labor. Talks
like a bumpkin, bodily not very strong. Loves motorized vehicles. Admires village big men. Aspires to wealth like theirs and independence
from his family.

Figure 1.

Cast of Characters (continued)

Ram Tilakam—Twelve-year-old distant cousin living with this family
as a servant. Quiet and smiling, very tiny, given cruelly heavy work
to do, but treated affectionately by the children, who call her Tilakakka ("Sister Tilakam"). Goes with the family on outings, gets decent clothing, bathes with the women of the family and is groomed by
them.
Modday—"Baldy." Servant of the family in her mid-twenties. Belongs to the Nayakar caste. Gets the heaviest work, dressed in rags,
poor food. Somehow she is remarkably strong. Tries to take care of
her daughter Ponni, but is rarely given the time.
Ponni—"Goldy." Two-year-old daughter of Modday. Neglected and
severely malnourished.
Peggymma—"Peggy-Mother." Ayya's student from America, living
with his family. Quiet, not aggressive, often withdrawn, moody
and emotional, unsure of herself, finicky about drinking water. Concerned about her family, families in general. Trying to learn Tamil.
Trying to take notes inconspicuously.
Daniel—Peggymma's six-year-old son. Cerebral, empiricist, waterloving. Frequently sick, but always looking healthier than any of the
other children in the household. Best friends with Umapathi. Pampered by all, given the best, sometimes mercilessly teased.
The family into which Kanakkamma married was a leader in its village, owning much land and many cattle. The "mother tongue" (tay mori)
of Reddiars is Telugu, the language of Andhra, of the north, the language
of their sacred texts. According to Kanakkamma, Telugu was a "higher"
language than Tamil. It was higher because it had much Sanskrit mixed
in it. Learned Brahmans spoke it. Lower castes in the village, seeking to
raise their status, spoke Telugu in imitation of their patrons. Kanakkamma's tay maman, her own mother's brother—her father-in-law—
owned a whole library full of Telugu books and was highly educated in
Telugu, she said. "Where are those books now?" she once lamented to
herself, then she turned to me and asked me (since I was studying Tamil),
"Why don't you learn our Telugu?" But it would not have done me much
good if I had learned it, as even Kanakkamma herself had long since
forgotten how to speak it.
In Kanakkamma's youth, her family and her husband's family had
been strict Vaishnavas, worshippers of Vishnu. They sang Telugu hymns
to Vishnu and they wore the narnam, the sign of Vishnu, painted on their

Generations

/

57

Paddi and Attai prepare bananaflowersfor cooking.
foreheads. Now they had become Saivas, worshippers of Siva, the god of
the South, and the hymns that they sang to their god were in Tamil. I
noticed that all of the people in the household over the age of fifteen had
Vaishnava names, but none of the children did.
The kula tevam, the family deity, of the household was an old grandmother who had lived in the house during the days of Muslim rule. Her
story was told to me by Kanakkamma's daughter-in-law, Sulochana. On
the festival of Ayudha Puja, Hindus worshipped their tools and weapons,
and there was a rule that the weapons should not be removed from the
place of worship until the day was over and the ceremonies completed.
On that day, one married couple from the family had gone to worship at
a Vishnu temple on a nearby mountain. On the same day, the family
received word that Muslims were on their way to attack the village. The
men went out without their weapons to meet the Muslims, and all of them
were killed. The one grandmother was left alone in the house with all the
children. She took a rope with a series of loops on it such as is used to tie
a string of cattle, put the loops around the children's necks, and decapitated them all, then killed herself, so that the family would not have to
face the shame of being plundered and raped by the Muslims. The couple
returned from the mountain just as the Muslims arrived at the house. The
Muslims saw the scene of carnage in the courtyard and felt pity and
admiration for the courage of the grandmother. They said that hencefor-

= deceased female

o

= living female

Figure 2.

^^

= deceased male
= living male

The family tree.

Generations

/

59

ward there would be no tax on that house. Such was the spirit of Reddiars,
in days long past.
The family worshipped this grandmother, whom they called Periyamakalakshmiyamma, together with another kula tevam called Vlrarakavapperumal, whose temple was at Tiruvallur near Madras. This was
the deity that the couple in the story had gone to worship. Kanakkamma's
only son, the head of the household now, had been named after this deity,
but no one in the family knew Vlrarakavapperumal's story—or so they
said when I asked. They worshipped the two, the male and the female
deity, as partners. They would offer the female of the couple, the spirit of
the defiant old grandmother, a red sari with a handloom border, "such as
a grandmother would wear," said Sulochana. I have noticed that goddesses with a streak of anger in them like to wear red.
Across the street from the house was a moderate-sized Vishnu temple,
in a state of disrepair. The stone statues all had pieces broken off. "The
Muslims did it," said Themozhiyar, Sulochana's brother-in-law. So the
damage to the temple, I calculated, was three or four hundred years old.
Who could say how old the temple itself was? They kept meaning to
repair the temple but the money could not be raised, Themozhiyar lamented. It was just too bad, he said.
Broken up though it was, this temple was a peaceful place, peaceful
and quiet. They kept it that way on purpose; the children were not allowed
to play in the courtyard, or if they did so, they had to play there quietly.
Every evening a bespectacled old Brahman priest sat on the temple's front
steps, reading the daily paper, retreating into the calm, the serenity of the
stone.
One other important temple stood in the village, the temple of the
goddess Kanniyamma, also called the Seven Sisters (Kanniyamma was
all seven, her priest explained). Her tiny shrine housed seven stones, all
featureless and identical, lined up in a row. In front of the shrine stood a
stone guardian that looked like a cross between the monkey-god Hanuman and a lion: muscular wrestler's body, a face that could have been
monkey or could have been cat. Here wild and expensive festivals were
held throughout the year: fire-walking ceremonies; glittery, funny, sexy
professional performances of Kanniyamma's life story; costumed nighttime processions; alcohol-induced spirit possession; fireworks. A rival
landlord sponsored many of these entertainments. At first, members of
my Tamil family refused to take me to them, saying they were for the
lower castes, for a deity that wasn't real. But later the women told me that
they liked to go to these festivals; only the men wouldn't come. Finally
they took me along.
Shortly after Kanakkamma married and moved into this village, her

Plate 7.

Padmini, Mohana, Anni and the children watch a festival parade.

father-in-law died and the family broke up. Then there were no longer
forty people in the household, but only two—Kanakkamma and her husband. Kanakkamma bore only one child, a son. At the time that I lived
with the family, the son, in his late forties, was the nominal head of the
household and a nominal head of the village. I say nominal, because in
neither case was it clear that the reins were in his hands. That year (1980)
he lost his post as hereditary village accountant because of state legislation decreeing that all hereditary village posts were to be abolished and
village officers were to be appointed by the Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu
instead. The news shocked the family. They said it was not a matter of
income—the village accountant was paid only a hundred rupees a
month—but it was an insult to them to be deprived of a hereditary post in
this manner.
The changes that the family had undergone over the past generations
were symbolized for me by two large portraits that hung on the wall in the
main room of the house. The first was a photograph of Kanakkamma's
father-in-law. He was a heavy man, with a stern expression on his cleanly
shaved, bejowled face. His head was also clean shaven and his feet were
bare, planted wide apart, firmly on the floor. He wore a silk waistcloth
and a silk shawl over his right shoulder. He was seated in an elaborately
carved chair, a staff held firmly in his right hand. There was a namam
painted on his forehead. From the sharply focused portrait, he gazed
keenly as an eagle into the eyes of the observer.
Adjacent was a picture of this man's son, Kanakkamma's husband. He
was thinner than his father. He had a full head of black hair and a Vic-

Generations

/

61

torian handlebar moustache, and he had on a pair of black, shiny,
European-style shoes. He wore a white south-Indian-style waistcloth
and a white, north-Indian-style shirt. Like his father, Kanakkamma's
husband wore a namam for his portrait, but his hands were empty and he
had what looked like a baffled expression on his face. The picture was out
of focus.
No portrait had been made of Kanakkamma's son, Raghavan, so I
don't know how he would have presented himself to the camera. In life
he was a quiet, friendly man who spoke hoarsely when he spoke at all. He
was thin and his face was gaunt. When he went out he wore rubber
sandals, a short-sleeved white cotton shirt, and a waistcloth. He never
wore a namam, even on festival occasions. The expression he wore was
often a grimace, like that of someone squinting into the sun.
Kanakkamma's husband died when Raghavan was still a child. As he
grew older, Kanakkamma became lonely for more children, and so she
adopted into her household Padmini and Bhakta, two of her younger
brother's six children. She also adopted Mohana, the child of her younger
sister, who had died. Padmini, Bhakta, and Mohana were all somewhere
between five and ten years old at the time. Shortly thereafter, the twentyyear-old Raghavan was married to Sulochana, Padmini's older sister,
who was nearly seventeen. Padmini at that point was ten years old. Sulochana said that when she was a very small child, it had been decided that
she would marry Raghavan. As she put it, "They made it 'certain' (niccayam), but that does not mean that the future marriage will happen
without fail, it only means that they have decided to do it unless they
change their minds later."
A year after Sulochana married Raghavan, she bore her first child, a
daughter, whom they named Anuradha. Ten years passed before Sulochana's next child was born.
When Padmini was fifteen, she and another sister, Lalita, were married
in a joint wedding ceremony to two brothers. Padmini's husband died.
(This story will be told later.) When Padmini was twenty-one, the family
married her to Themozhiyar. This wedding was arranged not by Padmini's parents, as the previous one had been, but by Padmini's older
sister Sulochana and her husband Raghavan. Themozhiyar was not close
kin to the family, but according to Sulochana, they felt he would make a
good bridegroom for Padmini because he was a friend of the family's
whom they knew well, he had no bad habits, he was a "good man."
The wedding was simple. There was no dowry. The ceremony was
conducted by Themozhiyar's guru, a Saiva philosopher who lectured to
a small group of friends and followers in Madras. Thus it was a "selfrespect wedding," that is, a wedding performed without the mediation of

62

/

Generations

Brahman priests; this was the kind of wedding advocated by early leaders
of the Tamil independence movement. Members of this movement saw
Brahmans as the primary agents of north Indian hegemony in the subcontinent. Themozhiyar, through his guru, had been greatly influenced by
this movement, and he brought his own version of its philosophy with
him when he married. His deity was Siva, whom he considered the god
of the south, in contrast to Vishnu, god of the north. "Praise to Siva of the
southern land, praise to the lord of all lands" was the refrain of the worship ceremonies that Themozhiyar conducted. When he joined Kanakkamma's family, Siva became their god also.
THEMOZHIYAR
" . . . don't be sad, for the light will shine

..."

Tirukkovaiyar, 15.
Padmini and Themozhiyar lived for a few months in the house of
Padmini's parents, but Padmini missed the place that had been her home
for the past ten years, and they soon moved back to the house of Sulochana and Raghavan, where they remained. A year later, in November
1971, Padmini's first daughter Arivaraci was born. Less than three weeks
after that, Sulochana delivered her own second child, Mankaiyarkkaraci.
Another pair of children were born in 1974, this time only two days
apart—Umapathi (Umapathi was her first son and last child) to Sulochana, and Arulmori (a second daughter) to Padmini. In 1978, again a
pair of children were born, again only a few days apart—a son Jnana Oli
to Padmini, and a son Sivamani to Padmini's cousin Mohana, who had
married Padmini's brother and was often in the same house with Padmini.
Themozhiyar commented tongue-in-cheek that he must have had a fertilizing effect on the family. Before he arrived, ten years passed without the
birth of a child in the household. After he arrived, three double births took
place. Each of his three children was bom with a partner.
Themozhiyar lived with his wife's family, probably because at the time
of his marriage he had no better place to go. Rents in Madras, where he
worked, were high; he owned no land in his native village. He had an older brother and a younger sister, but he disapproved of his sister's spouse
and of his brother's way of life, so he could live with neither of them.
According to Themozhiyar, his ancestors had owned a large quantity
of land, but his father lost it all in lawsuits. For many people of the time,
lawsuits were more a gambling game with high stakes than than they were
a mechanism for righting injustice. Themozhiyar's father liked to gamble
in this way.

Generations

/

63

Themozhiyar's mother died when he was ten. From that time on, he
said, things were hard. In his early teens, angry with his father, he ran
away from home and found work as a kitchen boy in Madras. Later, his
father and his younger sister joined him there. According to Themozhiyar, he supported them both together with himself. He joined a
union of restaurant workers. He said he used to grind batter until his
hands were blistered and raw. He showed me a poem that he wrote at that
time. It said, if someone sees your hunger and laughs at it, kill that man
and drink his blood. He said those were his feelings then and he meant
every word of the poem, but now he would not advocate killing.
In his home village, he had done well in school and someone had
dubbed him Temori, which means "sweet-talker" or "honey-talker" or
"divine language" ("themozhi" is an alternate English spelling for
temori). The -ar at the end was a kind of honorific, evidently appended
to the nickname by Themozhiyar himself. His original name had been
Raman.
As a kitchen boy in Madras, he had studied in his spare hours, he said.
He was not good at mathematics. He was frightened of English and never
learned it. He devoted himself, therefore, to the study of Tamil literature.
Some scholars from the Saiva Siddhanta Kazhakam, a large publishing
house in Madras, took him under their wing and tutored him further. In
particular, he became a student of a kindly man named Ramanath Pillai,
a devoted scholar of Tamil Saivism. Pillai earned his living as a high
school gym teacher, but he spent the better part of two decades writing a
commentary to the long, cryptic, but in places very beautiful ninthcentury Saiva text on immortality, Tirumantiram. For this commentary of
over a thousand pages, the Saiva Siddhanta Kazhakam paid Pillai a small
sum, supplementing his gym-teacher's salary.
How and when Themozhiyar "converted" to Saivism is a matter about
which he spoke vaguely. Certainly Ramanath Pillai, who also officiated
at his wedding, had much to do with cementing his faith. Of the various
students that Pillai had, Themozhiyar was his favorite; at least, he was the
most charismatic. When Pillai died in 1975, Themozhiyar assumed the
role of guru to the small group of worshippers that Pillai had led in song
and had lectured to every week.
Meanwhile, Themozhiyar had been increasing his own reputation and
prestige via other channels. Through independent study, he earned the
degree of Tamil Pulavar from Madras University, something like an
M.A. in Tamil. For a while, he worked writing cinema songs. Then he
got a managerial job in a large textile company. If he had stayed there, he
said with something like commingled pride and regret, he would be earn-

64

/

Generations

ing a large salary now. But he quit so that he could devote himself to the
study and teaching of Tamil Saivism.
Themozhiyar's marriage into the family brought in its wake many
changes. They must have valued him highly to make, for his sake, the
adjustments that they did, especially in view of the facts that he was not
a close kinsman, and that he was living uxorilocally. He did contribute a
city income, albeit an insecure one, to the household. It was a noble act
to take the widowed Padmini as his first and only wife and to look after
her. Otherwise, she would have been a burden to whichever of her siblings took her in, and indeed, as a young widow with no future, a burden
to herself. But I believe that less down-to-earth considerations than gratitude and economic need were also involved in the family's restructuring
of itself around Themozhiyar.
Like the stormy Lord Siva of South Indian myth, Themozhiyar, a
Saiva, took his wife from a Vaishnava family. Like Siva, he did not get
along with his in-laws. Padmini's parents disliked Themozhiyar. Her
father (like Siva's own father-in-law) referred to him sarcastically as "that
swami." Padmini's mother's mother said that there must be something
wrong with him to marry without a dowry. If there had not previously
been antagonism between Padmini and her parents, there was now. Sulochana and Raghavan sided with Themozhiyar.
In a house full of women, Raghavan now had a male companion. The
women came to refer to Raghavan as Periyavar, "the elder [or big] man,"
and to Themozhiyar as Cinnavan, "the younger [or small] man." Periyavar was a term of respect, Cinnavan a term of familiarity. The two men
now became a complementary and mutually dependent "set"—Raghavan
the patient and indulgent older brother, Themozhiyar the impetuous and
brilliant younger one. (Mythic models for this dyad are found in Siva's
sons Vinayagar and Murugan, in the Mahabharata heroes Yudhisthira and
Aijuna, and in the Tamil epic heroes Ponnar and Sankar. Themozhiyar
and Raghavan knew these mythic figures. Were they semiconsciously
following the pattern set by them? Or were the mythic brothers patterned
after the kind of team that real-life older and younger brothers sometimes
form?) By the seventh year of their union, Themozhiyar was already
talking about breaking away and starting a place of his own, like a real
younger brother, and Raghavan was trying to convince him to stay. Even
though there was no question of a patrimony to be divided, there was a
sense of a family core that should not be split up.
Themozhiyar called Raghavan "Annan," which translates "elder
brother," and this is what we will call him henceforward, since, as is often
the case in India, no one addressed him or referred to him by his "real"
name. After Themozhiyar's arrival, Sulochana became Anni, "older

Generations

/

65

brother's wife," to everyone, even her own children, who called her
Annimma. Kanakkamma was Amma, "mother," to Themozhiyar; she
was Attai, "father's sister," to the women. We will call her Attai. Themozhiyar himself was known as Ayya, "father, husband, lord," to all his
friends and students, and the women of his household often used this term
for him, so we will do so too.
KINGS AND ASCETICS
"Fierce one you belong to a cool bright land

..."

Tirukkdvaiyar, 100.
Siva is the god of ashes and ascetics, a disreputable crazy god, destroyer of the world, dancer in fire. His consort is a wild, impassioned
mother, uncontrollable, unpredictable, infinitely varied in form. Vishnu
is the protector, the nourisher, maintainer of the structure, sleeper in
water. His consort is bestower of riches, cow-like, never angry, never
cruel, never free.
So Vishnu is the god of most Reddiars, for they, in their ideal-type, are
landowners, men of the world, and proud of their riches. To 1980
Chingleput villagers, "Reddiar" meant "boss," not just anyone belonging
to the Reddiar jati, but the head of a landowning family, a powerful man.
For a young man of the Reddiar caste to say that he wanted to be "like a
Reddiar" meant that he wanted to own as much land as he could and be
as rich as he could and, most importantly, have others do his bidding.
The impression I received when I was alone with lower caste people
was that Reddiars were more feared than they were admired. Laborers
would tell me how badly they were treated and how little their landowning patrons would do for them. A Villi woman who worked for my Tamil
family sang, "What do the Reddiars give us to eat? They give us big rats!"
Another Villi woman jokingly asked Anni, "Did you give her [referring
to me] any work?" Anni said, "No, she doesn't do anything but study."
The Villi woman said, "If you have finished all your work, go to the
Reddiar street and they will give you more." All laughed. This was when
Reddiars were present. When they were absent, a Paraiyar man sang,
"There goes the Reddiar walking over the bund in his white waistcloth.
May he fall in the mud, break both his knees, and crawl all the way to his
Vaishnava heaven." This did not sound so good-natured to me.
Reddiars prided themselves not only on their wealth but on their toughness and their readiness to fight. As members of the kingly class (kshatriya varna), they were also warriors. Even the unathletic Ayya knew
how to do a fast dance with a staff that was supposed to ward off would-be
attackers. According to him, all of the men in his natal family had been

66

/

Generations

fighters, some of them killers. His father had nearly murdered two cousins who insulted his mother. His brother had driven off a gang of toughs
who attacked him in a dark alley. Reddiar women could be brave, too.
Anni had faced down a party of angry men who came to the house to find
Ayya and beat him up (according to Ayya). A cousin whose husband had
beaten her had turned and beaten him back. Then there was the tale of the
old grandmother. Ayya and the women discussed among themselves their
opinion that of all castes, Reddiars were the greatest scoundrels (aydkkiyarkal). But the stories that they told added up to a sense of pride in the
ability of Reddiars to deal out a beating, as well as to take one.
The biggest battles that Reddiars engaged in, however, were not fist
fights, but political contests with each other, landlord against landlord. In
the village where we lived, which had a population of five thousand and
so was nearly a town, there were two major factions, and our family was
obviously on the losing side. The leader of the opposing faction had the
allegiance of the lower castes, especially the Paraiyars, who were numerous and rapidly gaining in political consciousness. During the year of my
visit, this leader sponsored two expensive festivals to the village goddess
Kanniyamma, complete with goat sacrifices.
One evening, when a drama in honor of the goddess was being staged,
this rival landlord invited us to come to his house and view the drama
from his window. The women and children of our family went. The men
did not. Ayya said that the mother goddess did not exist. She represented
the ignorance of the people and he wanted nothing to do with her.
When we entered the house of the rival landlord, what I noticed first
was the difference between his children and ours. His children were sleek
and plump and well dressed. Their skin was smooth and pale. The young
girls wore long skirts and had flowers in their thick, braided hair. Our
children were small and bony; their skin was rough and sunburnt; their
hair was thin. Umapathi's eyes were sunken and had dark circles around
them. Arulmori's dress was several sizes too small; it had no buttons and
the hem was torn out. It was the only dress she had. The women in the
house offered us milk and sweets. I accepted, but the children refused,
and sat silent and taciturn throughout the festival.
Our family felt at odds with the lower castes, but they were fighting a
rising tide, while the rival landlord rode its crest. Ayya was building his
rice mill on a piece of land owned in common by several hamlets. He said
he had gotten permission from the hamlets to build there because it was
only wasteland on which nothing grew. But now the Idaiyar goatherds
were angry. They said he had taken away part of their grazing land. The
other landlord told them that Ayya had been to America, had American

Generations

/

67

sponsors, so he was certainly a rich man. Ayya told the Idaiyars that he
was a poor farmer who owned only four acres, while some Harijans
owned fifty (he did not mention that the family to which he belonged
owned the maximum acreage allowable by law, though the Idaiyars must
have known this). For days, Annan and Ayya went back and forth among
the hamlets, trying the appease the angry Idaiyars. At last the dispute
seemed to be settled. Meanwhile, a militant young Paraiyar farmer
(Paraiyars are a large untouchable caste, most of whom are landless laborers) had purchased an acre of land adjacent to the few acres of chalky soil
that Ayya had recently purchased and was cultivating. Ayya watched as
truckload after truckload of topsoil was brought in from somewhere and
unloaded on the Paraiyar's plot, a plot that he himself had hoped to buy.
Rumor had it that the Paraiyar had gotten a government loan to buy the
land. Ayya was angry. "The legislation is all in their favor," he said. "A
Brahman boy who is at the top of his class cannot get a seat in a medical
college, while a Paraiyar boy who is at the bottom will. You cannot even
call a Paraiyar a Paraiyar. If you do, you will be arrested and thrown in
jail." Nowadays Paraiyars were called Harijans, "God's children," the
name Gandhi had coined to refer to all untouchable castes.
Our family undertook to turn the laws favoring Harijans to their advantage. Government assistance was given to Harijans who wished to purchase cattle, so the family bought a cow in the name of Munusamy, one
of their hereditary Paraiyar servants. Munusamy tended the cow, and the
family took the milk. But one day, Munusamy claimed the cow as his
own, and the family was unable to get it back. When they told him they
would no longer support him unless he gave them the cow, he chose to
keep the cow, and moved away. "The Paraiyars of the village used to be
loving and humble," said Anni, "but now they are starting to become
arrogant, like the Paraiyars of the city."
Traditionally, on a certain festival day, the women of the family would
spend the day cooking up dosais—rice pancakes— and would give one
dosai to each of the laborers who worked for the family. Previously, Anni
said, the laborers would come to the house and graciously accept their
dosais. But now, she said, the laborers were insisting that one dosai was
not enough, they wanted two. "By whose command," Anni asked, "do
we work all day long preparing dosais for them? If they will no longer
accept the dosais lovingly, we will no longer make them." So the custom
was terminated.
But in truth there had probably never been much love lost between
Anni and the servants who worked for her. She said, "Servant mentality
(yelaikkara putti) never changes. No matter how much you do for them,

68

/

Generations

no matter how much you say that you and they are one, if someone asks
them what you've done for them, they will always say, 'Nothing.' "
There was one exception to this rule, said Anni, an old man who had
worked for the family for many years. "He would always say to others,
'Our Reddiar is a golden Reddiar.' He used to bathe ten times a day. He
wouldn't tolerate even a speck of dirt on his body." But he had died a year
previously when a bus struck the bullock cart he was driving. "The man,
the wagon, and the two bullocks were all turned into chutney. It was very
sad," said Anni.
While the village Paraiyars were an increasingly threatening force in
the lives of the Reddiar family, their opposites, the village Brahmans,
were the objects of nobody's envy. The anti-Brahminical self-respect
movement, the power of bhakti devotionalism which denied sacrality to
social bounds, the secularism and atheism that were embraced with religious passion by many, these and many other forces made Brahmans no
longer necessary as mediators between God and Man. Village priesthood
had long since ceased to be a lucrative occupation for Brahmans, if ever
it was one. Out of pity, the women of the household kept the family's
hereditary Brahman priests on and fed them. The charity that in principle
only flowed "down" in the form of gifts and clothing to lower castes, also
flowed "up."
On the day of the Varalakshmi ceremony, a household celebration in
honor of Lakshmi, goddess of wealth, consort of Vishnu, Anni had invited a Brahman priest to chant the names of Lakshmi, as the ceremony
calls for celebrants to do, in Sanskrit. The priest arrived, a ragged,
skinny, chicken of a man, with a huge tumor dangling in a pouch of skin
like an oriole's nest beneath his throat. He entered the puja room and
chanted something in Sanskrit-like syllables for about an hour, but it was
evident even to me that he was winging it. Meanwhile the women and the
children were in the main room, singing Manikkavacakar's "Sivapuranam," a Tamil hymn in praise of Siva, which they always sang
when hymns were called for. (Ayya had brought the Sivapuranam into the
household, and had installed it as the family prayer. Anni and those in her
charge had learned it and recited it fervently.)
After the priest had left, I asked Anni if it was really necessary for him
to come to the house and chant for the ceremony to be performed. Anni
said no, but this was the way such Brahmans lived. Now times had
changed and they had little to support them.
In this household's celebration of the Varalakshmi festival, I saw that
issues other than those of sect and caste were at stake. In the morning of
this particular day, for reasons I never learned, Anni was tense. As part

Generations

/

69

of the celebration, she decorated the door of the house red and yellow in
kumkum and turmeric. Why decorate the door? I asked her. "Because it
is a woman," she answered tersely. She and Padmini and their twentyyear-old nephew Vishvanathan had made a pandal, a little house for the
festival goddess, and had decorated it with dots of kumkum and turmeric,
which they covered with mango and banana leaves, which they covered
with paper flowers, which they covered with a silk sari. The decorations
beneath were hidden by the decorations above—layer upon layer of mysterious armor. The goddess in the pandal was a pot decorated with goldcolored eyes and mouth, a coconut on top, a garland of taram flowers and
leaves around its rim, a necklace around its neck. Taram flowers are never
to be used at weddings, Anni had told me (they grow singly among spiky
leaves so they mean lone self-protected womanhood, they have an aggressive smell so they mean excessive sexuality, snakes live in their
bushes so they mean hidden danger), but for this ceremony she insisted
they were important. Anni had asked Ayya to bring back taram flowers
from town and Ayya had replied, "Don't count on me (ennai nampate),"
in irritation as he walked out the door. Was it because he disliked the
goddess? Or because it was a Vaishnava ceremony and he was a Saiva?
Or something else? Anni had been sullen for the rest of the day, but the
taram flowers had been gotten from somewhere, and were used. It occurred to me, noticing how similar the pot-goddess was to images of the
smallpox goddess Mariamman that I had seen, that perhaps Anni was
celebrating this ceremony not as a tribute to Lakshmi, the ever-smiling
wife of Vishnu, but as a tribute to the fiercer mother, the rival and mistress of Siva.
WAR
". . . On the mountain of our half-woman lord

..."

Tirukkovaiyar, 100.
The biggest transition the family had to make upon Ayya's arrival was
the change from Vaishnavism to Saivism. Once, to see what he would
say, I asked Ayya to explain to me why there had been in the past such
antagonism between Vaishnavas and Saivas. What did it matter which
god they worshipped? Weren't they all the same? Ayya answered that in
ancient times, people worshipped God as mother and father together.
Later they split them up and some worshipped the mother and some
worshipped the father and they fought each other. Siva means light (oil)
and the mother means darkness, greenness, fertility (pacumai), he said.
Similarly, Vishnu (Tirumal) stands for fertility, for wealth (porul), for

70

/

Generations

commingling (mayakkam), for compassion (karunai), all of which are
characteristics of the mother.
Thus for Ayya, the conflict between Saivism and Vaishnavism was a
conflict between male and female, or between what males stood for and
what females stood for, between pure consciousness free of the burden of
matter, and the pleasurable, dark, and rich mingling of substances.
According to Ayya, before his arrival this family was given to enjoyments and expenditures which it could scarcely afford. He said that Anni
would often, on a whim, take a taxi to the movies, that she would spend
money without keeping track of where it went, and that as head cook she
would spend more per week on coffee than on food. Annan, he said,
contributed his share to the wastage, going deeply into debt to build a
huge brick warehouse which was only partly completed and had never
been used. Ayya said that when he arrived he taught the family frugality
and simplicity, though he admitted that they were still a long way from
being completely reformed. Now an ascetic air permeated the household.
Coffee was no longer consumed. Neither were eggs. The women wore
few or no jewels. All the children of the family were taught Saiva hymns
and wore sacred ash, symbol of renunciation. There were no grand celebrations. But a strong worldly undercurrent still was there. The women
and children still celebrated Vaishnava festivals, and festivals to the mother, while the men abstained from both. Eggs were cooked for me in
Ayya's absence, though I did not ask for them. The women even told me
that they had secretly raised goats for slaughter, to raise household
money.
As soon as the mother and the father became two, they had started
fighting—so Ayya had said. As I watched the daily life of this household,
it soon became evident to me that the battle between the male and female
modes of existence was not waged exclusively on a mythological level.
For there was a continual open struggle between the males and the females of our family. Moreover, it was an uneven battle, just as the cosmic
struggles often are, for Annan avoided combat, and Ayya, the outsider,
was left to contend single-handedly against the formidable alliance of
Anni, Padmini, and Mohana.
For his part, Ayya would score points by saying that the women didn't
feed him properly, that they were unhygienic, and that they were poor
workers. He would ask for rice water and complain if they gave him
anything else, then when they complied with his request he would complain that they gave him only rice water. He refused to bathe in the water
from the well in the courtyard, saying that it was poisonous, but he
scolded the women for not bathing before cooking everyday. He blamed
Padmini and Anni for not keeping the house clean enough and said that

Generations

/

71

they were responsible for the children's frequent illnesses. He also
scolded them for laughing and playing too much.
The women were not without their answers. When Ayya was present
they would argue vehemently with him. In his absence they would work
to get me on their side. They invited me to play cards and dice with them
and to go to x-rated movies with them (Padmini used this term), though
Ayya said such things were immoral and a waste of time. It was never
clear to me whether their invitations were joking or were serious. Sometimes I thought that they were trying to trick me into revealing that I
indulged in what people seemed to think were typically American vices.
Other times I thought that they truly enjoyed the idea of being naughty
and doing things the men would disapprove of. Certainly, smaller acts of
rebellion were a way of life for them.
Once, when we were picking vegetables in the garden, I came upon a
preying mantis. I commented that among these bugs, the wife devours the
husband. "That's just the way it should be," said Padmini, unsmiling.
Most interesting to me was their dispute over language. Both Ayya and
Annan insisted that family members should always speak in proper, literate Tamil. Certain words and certain sounds were ugly to them; they were
koccai, crude, low, inelegant, illiterate Tamil. But these were just the
words and sounds that the women's speech was peppered with, and the
women refused to change.
Just as some urbane Kentuckians hate fronted nasal vowels (the way
hillbillies make "fire" rhyme with "hair"), Ayya hated fricatives, especially the -cci sound that came in the casual speech of the region at the end
of many words. He preferred the smoother endings that literate speech
was given to. But one of Padmini's most often used words was etacci
("whatever"). And Mohana, because of a gap between her teeth, had a
slight lisp, which Ayya would mock. "Look how she says, 'Fal, faV
[for pal, 'milk']," he would say derisively. Mohana would only smile.
If a woman used the word panni ("made, did"), Ayya would scold her.
"Only pigs (panni) say panni," he would say. He told the offender to use
the word ceytu ( a literate form) instead. And the woman would answer
guilelessly, "I try, but I just can't remember," or more straightforwardly,
"You say it your way and I'll say it mine."
It was Anni who was most likely to give the latter answer. Though she
had memorized much Saiva poetry, and knew the literate forms well, in
worldly life she made the use of worldly forms a matter of principle. So,
when a guest came to the house, and I asked him, "How is your wife
(pondaddi)," using a casual form, Padmini corrected me, saying that
I should use the more proper word for wife, manaivi. But Anni said, "For
Ayya we say manaivi, but in this house we say pondaddi."

72

/

Generations

Similarly, when I had asked Annan for a list of the castes in the village,
he had called the village goatherds by the name Yatavar, a literate name
identifying them with the cowherds of Krishna's youth. Anni had come
up and said, "They're not Yatavars, they're Idaiyars. Everyone in the
village calls them Idaiyars. If you teach her to call them Yatavars, no
one will know what she's talking about."
The dispute was carried even into the naming of the children. The three
girls born after Ayya joined the household each had two names, one given
by Ayya, the other given by Anni. Ayya's names for them, formally
bestowed at naming ceremonies after their births, were long, poetic
names, signifying lofty abstract ideals—Arivaraci ("Queen of Knowledge"); Mankaiyarkkaraci ("Queen of Ladies"); Arulmori ("Language of
Grace"). The names given by Anni were informal, and were contextoriented, based on the circumstances of the child's birth. Arivaraci was
Petti, "the elder," because she was born a few days earlier than her cousin, Mankaiyarkkaraci, whom Anni had named Cinni, "the younger."
Arulmori was Varuni, named after Varuna the rain god, because on the
day of her birth there were untimely rains. Interestingly, none of the boys
was given such a casual, context-oriented name by Anni, although all of
the children, boys as well as girls, were often called by shortened versions
of their formal names (Arivu, Mankai, and Arul for the girls; Uma, Oli,
and Siva for the boys Umapathi, Jnana Oli, and Sivamani).
The children called each other by the names Anni had given them, but
if you asked any of them what her name was, she would answer with the
name given by Ayya. However, Ayya chastised the adults for calling the
children by the pet names given by Anni; through usage of the pet names,
the "real" names would be lost, he said. He said a name should be such
that every time someone spoke it, they would be reminded of some high
principle.
The men and women of the household agreed on many general issues.
They both felt that the family should be a "high" family, that it should be
well thought of by the world, that it should be capable of feeding many
people. But the men's and women's reasons for agreeing sometimes differed. For instance, both agreed as to the inferiority of servants and
low-caste people, but the reasons men gave were mainly attributional, the
reasons women gave were mainly interactional. Men said that servants
drank, ate meat, spent money as soon as they got it on entertainment and
food rather than saving and spending wisely, and lacked responsibility.
Women said that servants sowed dissension in the family, were ungrateful, stole things, and lied.
These disagreements seemed to boil down to a few basic differences
between male and female ideologies: men stressed purity and cleanliness,

Generations

/

73

order, peacefulness, and high ideals. Women stressed physical togetherness, interdependence, and adaptation to circumstances. For the women,
independence was not all that desirable, neither were purity and cleanliness tremendously important, neither were peace and quiet. Hence, Ayya
often fled from the hullabaloo of the household to what he called his
dhyanamandapam, his "meditation hall," the little house he had built
across the lakebed from the village settlement. When he retreated there,
Anni would plead with him to come back to the house, because (she
claimed) she enjoyed her daily conflicts with him. She said that when
Ayya wasn't around she felt as though she had nothing to do, the house
seemed deserted, she finished all her work too easily. When Ayya was
there she was happier, because it seemed as though she had a lot to do,
and she never finished her work, for arguing with him on one side and
working on the other. She loved this gregarious chaos.
But Ayya said that he didn't like the house to be like a "factory,"
making cooking into a big affair involving lots of people. It should be
finished quickly and easily; he could do it alone if he didn't have work
outside the house.
Ayya liked to point out that he was separate, not closely related to
anyone in the household, and that he avoided the bonds of "attachment"
(pacam). Anni said that she and other women liked get-togethers. They
liked to work together, bathe together, eat together.
The difference was neatly symbolized at a large wedding that we went
to. The men were all in one hall, all dressed in white, quietly listening to
a concert. The women were all with the bride and groom in another hall,
forming in their congregation a sea of multicolored saris, moving about,
and "talking," Anni told me, "about kin."
Thus there was an agonistic relationship between the sexes, in truth an
endless war, in this household, and not only there. The lines were drawn,
the conflicting values clearly articulated. One might think that in such a
situation men would choose to be more manly (whatever that might mean
to them) and women to be more womanly; one would expect each side to
wear its sex proudly, as it were. But this was not exactly the case. Instead
the struggle between the sexes fostered androgyny on both sides, as
though each sex desired to steal the other's thunder, or step across the line
drawn around it by the other.
Ayya was a guru and he had had a guru. Though he loved this guru and
nearly deified him, he refused initiation from him, thus causing the guru
(who also loved Ayya) much pain. According to Ayya, the guru had said,
"How would it be if a man and a woman lived together without marriage
ceremonies? Undertaking a religious path without initiation is the same."
In a certain way, the guru had wanted to marry Ayya.

74

/

Generations

Ayya was a preacher who taught about the ideals of Tamil womanhood
as he saw them—softness, meltingness, subtlety, mystery, modesty. "As
I teach," he said, "I become what I teach." To his followers, he exemplified many of the feminine ideals that he lectured about. Almost all of
his followers were men, and some of them expressed an open homosexual
interest in him. One of his longtime friends told him, "You are so attractive it's a shame you weren't born a woman."
The women of Ayya's household, by contrast, were far from his ideal.
They, especially his wife, for all the goodness of their hearts, were loud,
immodest, short-tempered, and unbending.
Padmini would bathe in the open courtyard where people from the
outside could come and go, sometimes stripped to the waist. Anni argued
with a lower caste male servant after her bath, casually dressing herself as
she talked. When the women worked in the garden they would hike their
saris and petticoats to above mid-thigh. When they were relaxing in the
afternoon, they would lie on their backs with their legs apart, their knees
bent back and their feet in the air, like puppies. With careless grace, they
kept just the essentials covered.
Padmini was good at repairing the machinery in the rice mill. Ayya
wept at the thought of her doing this hard work, but Padmini obviously
enjoyed it. She was also good at supervising labor crews, striding among
them like a queen, loudly ordering them about. When the foreman of one
of the labor crews working on the rice mill came in for lunch, complaining that his men couldn't work because they hadn't gotten enough to eat,
Padmini simultaneously argued with him at the top of her voice and
served him a bountiful meal, interrupting her invective every now and
then to ask politely if he would like more of this or that vegetable, in what
struck me as a strange combination of hostility and hospitality, which
somehow won him over. It was the same with the village servants. She
would often work in the garden or the fields with young and middle-aged
Paraiyar and Nayakar men, laughing with them and scolding them, teasing them about their eyesight, their incomes, their physiques. No one
seemed to feel that she needed protection.
In contrast to the married women was Anuradha, Anni's grown daughter. Always smiling and soft-spoken, she never lost her temper and she
scolded no one. When she played with the children she made them laugh,
rather than (like her elders) beating them or teasing them and making
them cry. She rarely went out, even to the garden or to weddings, she
observed full menstrual seclusion, never assumed immodest bodily positions, always kept her body covered down to her toes, wore matching
bangles and a brassiere. She had several years more education than her
mother and her aunts—perhaps this accounted for the difference: she had

Generations

Plate 8.

/

75

Anuradha.

been taught what a "civilized" (nakarikamana) woman ought to be.
Cleanliness, quiet, and modesty were values of the city. To appear civilized was important to many young people of the villages. Or perhaps
Anuradha was practicing for the day when she would marry into a household other than the one in which she was raised, where the prevailing
ideology might be different.
GROWING UP TAMIL
"...

harder than anything to know

..."
Tirukkovaiyar, 2.

The children of our family were rough-and-tumble, disobedient, competitive, mysterious. None of them had any duties or chores in the household except to leam lessons, which they did poorly. When they were out
of school they would tear around the house wildly or play in the dust of
the temple yard across the street. But they never played with any of the
other children of the village, and they never strayed beyond the invisible

76

/

Generations

boundaries separating them from the forbidden parts of the world, which
constituted most of it.
In the morning, when it was time for a bath, the older children would
race to the bathing tank, the winner shouting in English, "First," the
runner-up shouting, "Second." But they would all bathe together, the
boys naked, the girls in their underpants. The toddlers would be there,
too, playing with the water that happened to splash on their bodies, but
the older children would take no notice of them. Later, an adult would
bathe the young ones.
Sometimes the children would squabble. Attai said that it was children's nature (iyatkai) to fight. As they grew up, if they developed wisdom (putti), they would stop. Padmini had counseled me never to become
involved in children's fights. I noticed that when adults did become involved in children's disputes, they did not undertake to determine who
was right and who was wrong, but tried only to create an expedient
illusion that would calm the child for the moment. When a small child
cried because of an injustice perpetrated upon it by some older person, the
caretaker would pretend to strike the offender, and the small child would
be pacified, to the amusement of bystanders.
Not only the tension of conflict but the tension of desire would be
resolved through the creation of illusion. Anni said, "When we take the
children to town, they want to buy something. I will say, 'The things in
this store are not good, we'll look in the next store.' And I will say the
same thing in the next store, and so on until it is time to leave, and then
I say, 'We must hurry or we'll miss the bus,' and so I get home without
having spent any money for them."
None of the caretakers of the children ever said to me, "The world is
deceitful, so while we are the world to our children we must be deceitful
also." Yet I felt that the children of this household were raised on a diet
of maya.
As the children grew older, the deceits grew more elaborate. So, for
instance, once, as the adults were having lunch at the rice mill, Umapathi
arrived with the other children. Ayya, for some reason, asked Umapathi
alone whether he had eaten, and Umapathi replied no. Anni insisted that
he had eaten. She punished him by standing him in front of the picture of
Natarajan that sat on the altar in Ayya's retreat and demanding that he
apologize, in the standard manner of apologizing to a deity, by crossing
his arms and holding his earlobes and bowing up and down repeating, "I
will not tell a lie." Umapathi did so, weeping. Then Padmini fed him
alone a full meal. It appeared to me from the way he ate that indeed he
could not have had a full meal that day, but Anni did not seem to recognize this. She told Ayya that Umapathi had gotten into the habit of lying

Generations

/

77

frequently. They would ask him if he had done his homework and he
would say yes, and they would look in his notebooks and find them
empty.
A similar episode occurred with Umapathi's age-mate, Arulmori. She
had bathed in the moming and wanted a clean dress, but the dress that had
been laid out for her to wear had been used as a towel by Umapathi, and
Arulmori's skirt and blouse, her only other outfit, were in a pile of laundry from the previous evening, waiting to be washed. Her mother Padmini shouted at her, "Moddai [the servant] washes clothes only in a
crowd," indirectly scolding Moddai, who was on the other side of the
courtyard washing dishes. Then Padmini said to Arulmori, "You can
wear a dirty dress as a punishment for the mistakes you made in the past
(ceyta tappukku tandanai)." Earlier that morning, Arulmori had made a
mistake in her homework, and Padmini had shouted at her until she wept.
Anni had gently comforted her, saying, "Don't cry. If there is a mistake,
you can correct it."
Such surprising events were daily affairs in the lives of the children. In
general, a child could never know if or when or even upon whom the
punishment would fall for a mistake that was made. One person would err
and another would be punished for a mistake the other had committed in
the past and thought forgotten. Or one would punish and another comfort.
Always, in these cases, the punisher was the child's own mother, and the
comforter somebody else. Or alternatively, the same person would punish and comfort, punish and comfort, until the child completely lost its
bearings, and began to weep. Indeed, this was a favorite game for adults
and older children to play with small children—to offer a plaything and
then withdraw it, offer and then withdraw, offer and then withdraw.
When the child broke down and wept, it would be cuddled and comforted, or else whisked away to enjoy some other amusement.
Somehow, the tears of a child were entertaining; they brought forth
laughter from onlookers. Children themselves, finally, learned to laugh
when they were scolded, at least some did. Their laughter would anger
the scolder, and the scolding would grow angrier and louder, then the
laughter, then the scolding, until at a climax the child would either run
away, or suddenly burst into tears. Adult arguments would often reverse
this pattern: people would shout back and forth at each other more and
more loudly, until it seemed as though they might come to blows, and
then suddenly a joke would be made and all would burst into laughter. In
movies, tears and laughter were a stereotypic combination. There was
something about the union of sharply contrasting feelings that appealed to
people. For a Westerner, it could be very confusing.
Once I saw Mankaiyarkkaraci climbing a power tower. I yelled at her

78

/

Generations

Plate 9.

Mankaiyarkkaraci.

angrily, "Have you got cotton between your ears? Come down from
there!" She climbed down with what I took for a mocking smile on her
face. I scolded her; she laughed; I scolded her; she laughed, then suddenly
she was weeping. I felt remorse. I tried to apologize, to comfort her, but
she continued sobbing. After that, for the rest of the afternoon, she refused to speak to me, and sat with her face buried in her hands, while I sat
with her, first pleading with her to understand my point of view, then
joking and trying to make her laugh. Sometimes her body shook, but with
her face in her hands, I could not tell whether she was weeping, or
pretending to weep, or laughing. As the sun went down, Arivaraci came
to fetch her, and told me that Mankai would be all right. The next day it
was as though nothing had happened.
Such was my relationship with the children. They seemed to me to
be very like American children, up to a point. Beyond that point, they

Generations

/

79

lost me, or rather, entangled me in webs I was surprised to find myself
caught in.
Umapathi was the oldest boy in the family, the only son of the household head. He was much smaller and weaker than my own son of the same
age, but much more bold, and he beat my son in footraces every time.
Courage was expected of him. The other children would be comforted
when they wept, for the other boys were babies, and the girls were girls.
Only Uma had always to be brave.
Umapathi spoke in a gravelly voice, and both of his fathers, Annan and
Ayya, were angry with him for using slang (koccai tamir) and mixed
language rhymes. Ayya had chastised him for a bit of doggerel he had
made up: "I am sorry, attai viddukkari." I thought that this was an interesting rhyme, because Uma had chosen a phrase from English that could
not be translated into Tamil without great distortion (Tamil people never
apologize so directly), and matched it with a Tamil phrase equally untranslatable (to gloss it "girl of my father's sister's house" misses its
essential cheekiness), and had produced a meaningful jingle (a boy apologizing to his father's sister's daughter, the muraipen, the "rightful wife,"
for something—perhaps marrying another). Moreover the rhyme was
good, and he had managed the end-rhyming characteristic of English
verse but alien to Tamil, together with a suggestion of the initial rhyme
characteristic of Tamil verse, even while the initial line was English and
the final line Tamil. A great merger. But Ayya had criticized him severely
for it. "Language is a living (oru jivari)," he had said. "You must not chop
it up (tundakkakkudatu)." Then Ayya questioned Uma, "Do you want to
be high or low?" Uma was silent. Ayya repeated the question. Uma, with
tears in his eyes, said, "High." But Uma, as the first son ("the only child,
that is, the only male child," Ayya had called him, before Jnana Oli was
born) had to bear so much, and had such a reputation for disobedience in
the family, that I wondered how fully the question "High or low?" was
really resolved in his mind.
Arulmori was called a "daddy's girl" (appappillai). She used to swing
on her father's clothes and hang on his body as though he were a tree, and
Ayya would say fondly, "I like this Arulmori." By contrast, when
Umapathi had tugged at his father's clothing, his father Annan had
snapped back, "Fool!", though Annan was in general much more patient
than Ayya. Arulmori was her mother's second daughter and nobody's
son; not so much was expected of her and her life seemed less hard than
Umapathi's. In one respect, Arulmori was the balancing other half of the
rough-talking Umapathi: true to her name, which meant "language of
grace," she spoke in clear, literate Tamil. Of all the children, she recited
poetry the best, and she had a clear, musical voice.

80

/

Generations

Plate 10. Umapathi.
But unlike her older sister and her younger brother, Arulmori had no
same-sex age-mate, and hence (as we shall see they had) she had no real
human mirror. She loved to dance with the shadow of her own body on
the wall, so that when she grew older, her parents bought dancing lessons
for her—a rare extravagance for this family. Like Umapathi she was
alone and embodied her own opposite—good and bad, like Uma's high
and low. She reminded me a little of a village goddess when one day she
wiped my son's newly skinned knee hard with her thumb and smiling
sweetly, gleefully, up at me, said, "Blood!"
GOING DOWN TAMIL
"...

as though one full soul drowning

..."

Tirukkdvaiyar, 307.
Anni ruled the household now. Her mother-in-law Attai had long since
lost her power there. She was arthritic and could scarcely walk, and

Generations

/

81

Plate 11. Arulmori.
cataracts were growing over both eyes, but she could still see well enough
to read the newspaper when she wore her glasses. She read it every day
and reported to me the news from America and the Middle East. But the
changes in her own world made her sigh. The attention the younger
women paid her was cursory. They went their own way, which was not
Attai's, and made no apologies. Attai remained always the image of
patience and resignation, even while she bemoaned the structurelessness
that now engulfed her home.
Across the street from the family house was the ancient Perumal temple, in ruins like the house itself. Ordinarily, the temple was closed and
inactive, but one day a year, for the celebration of Krishna's birthday,
they opened its doors. On this day Attai, who almost never left the house,
would hobble across the street to pay obeisance to her old lord.
The age-long tensions between Siva and Vishnu, ascetics and householders, Brahmans and kings, were submerged now beneath the rivalries
of the mother and the father, the worker and the owner. There were no
Vaishnava-Saiva brawls, for the worshippers of both these gods now had
stronger common enemies. But as the world decayed, it must have
seemed to Attai that Vishnu the preserver was going under, while Siva,

82

/

Generations

the god of paradox and apocalypse, triumphed. More than once, Attai
lamented that all was mixed.
All the higher castes celebrated Krishna's birthday. On this day the
Sivanadiyar Kuddam ("The Gathering of Slaves to Siva"), a devotional
group to whom Ayya lectured weekly, made a pilgrimage from Madras
to the Tirumal temple on a hilltop near our village. On this day, said
Anni, they became devotees of Vishnu, and people who ordinarily wore
ashes, symbol of devotion to Siva, on this day wore the namam, she
said. But I noticed that our family did not wear the namam, and I also
noticed that Ayya and Annan were absent during the celebrations.
All day long, the children shouted "Govinda!" (a name of Krishna)
with a drawn-out "Go" rising in pitch and amplitude, exploding in a
triumphant "Vinda!" It reminded me of an American high school football
cheer. The children loved the sound of it. A crowd of children in the
village went together from house to house, carrying a pot in which they
received from each house a handful of rice.
In the early morning, the Sivanadiyar Kuddam also went from house
to house, pulling a chariot, and singing, "Kanecan caranam, caranam
Kanecan" ("Ganesan refuge, refuge Ganesan." Ganesan is the elephantheaded elder son of Siva.) By midday, several men and one woman were
dancing before the chariot, possessed. One man was possessed by Murugan (Siva's younger son, god of war and beauty) and the surrounding
crowd was chanting, "Veil Vel! Vel!" ("Spear! Spear! Spear!" The spear
is one of Murugan's symbols.) A man dressed as Tirumal ("The holy
dark one," Vishnu, Krishna) with a garland around his neck, danced with
the man possessed by Murugan. At the end of the dance, the two men
embraced.
I missed many of the details of the festival—the variety of myths
which fed it, the range of experiences which it produced. One fact about
the festival was obvious. Like so many other festivals, it was a celebration of commingling.
On this day, as on all festival days, the first thing that the women of our
household did when they rose was bathe. Usually they didn't bathe until
late morning after the cooking was over and the children had eaten and
gone to school. Then they would bathe individually, in the small enclosed
bathroom. But today and on other festival days they bathed in the open,
next to the well, all of them together. The women would not eat on this
festival day until the food had been offered to the deity. Before the food
offering, Anni laid a trail of pieces of camphor from the concrete projection of the front porch, through the front door, into the puja room where
a plate of food lay. The camphor was lit by Anni and Padmini, with the
children following. The deity to which food was offered was a namam

Generations

/

83

drawn on the wall of the puja room, beneath the altar with Ganesan on it,
the drawing of the namam flanked by drawings of conch and discus,
Vishnu's symbols. As the food was offered, all the women and children
with Anni leading sang the "Sivapuranam," as they had done for the
Varalakshmi ceremony. The fact that these were festivals in honor of
Vishnu, not of Siva, did not affect the choice of a hymn.
The little children were made to bow before the image of the namam.
Then the older children did so, then Mohana, Padmini, and Anni. Attai
was the last to offer obeisance to the namam. She remained on her
knees, her body bent over, for more than a minute, as though she feared
this homage to Vishnu would be her last. But perhaps it was only her age
and her aching legs and back that made it difficult for her to move more
quickly.
On festival days, it became evident that mixing was a goal in itself for
our family—Vaishnava and Saiva, Sanskrit and Tamil, children and
adults, male and female—all were joined in happy confusion. Festivals
were a time for people to do things together—to bathe together, to build
pandals and make special foods together, to worship together, to go about
the village in processions together. But mixture was not a pleasure reserved for festival occasions. It was celebrated and renewed daily. The
greatest amount of mixing took place in the morning, when all the people
were in the courtyard, getting ready for the day. There were many jobs to
be done at that time. The children had to be bathed, combed, dressed, and
fed and their lessons listened to. Water had to be fetched for cooking,
drinking, and bathing. Preparations had to be started for the main meal.
Flowers had to be picked from the bush growing in the courtyard. The
cow had to be washed. The house had to be swept. Myriad tasks were
performed in the early morning, before the sun got high and the weather
hot, before the children went to school and the men to the city. Some
relatively stable division of labor might have been devised for this time,
to avoid confusion and increase efficiency, but in fact there was nothing
of the sort. The courtyard was the household's heart and meeting ground,
governed by Anni, and she made it plain that order and efficiency were
not her primary concerns. The most important thing was for people to be
working together, noisily if possible, and with much moving about—
both visual and audible tumult.
My notes for a morning, as I sat in the courtyard watching people go
about their business around me, contain the following observations:
Padmini is helping the children with their homework. Some of them
are crying. The old grandmother (Padmini's mother's mother) churns
buttermilk. Anni cooks with the help of Modday the servant and then with

84

/

Generations

the old grandmother's help. Annan dresses the toddler Jnana Oli. Padmini
and Modday roughly bathe the children. Arulmori cries because she has
gotten powder in her eyes. After their bath, Anni combs the girls' hair.
Muttammal, the Paraiyar servant, sweeps and collects cowdung. Annan
is on the front porch singing a hymn. The old grandmother and I pick
flowers. Dogs eat the fecal mess left by Jnana Oli. Crows eat the other
garbage. Padmini calls me to eat several times, but does not feed me yet.
Eight-year-old Arivaraci and six-year-old Arulmori fight for hair ribbons.
Anni helps Padmini bathe. Arivaraci picks up Jnana Oli. Attai advises
Arivaraci and Arulmori regarding their fight. Moddai cooks dosais by
herself. Her two-year-old daughter Ponni calls her but she does not answer. Muttammal waters and bathes the cow. The half-blind servant (a
woman who does occasional work for the family) helps Padmini bathe.
On any given morning virtually anybody could be found doing virtually any of the tasks that needed to be done. The only hard and fast rule
that I could discover was that Harijan servants could not participate in the
cooking and serving of food, but they did everything else, and Moddai,
the Nayakar servant, often cooked. I never saw the older men Ayya and
Annan picking flowers or cleaning up, but Ayya claimed he had done
both these jobs for his sister when he raised her, and once, when I had
loaned one of my blankets to a Harijan man to sleep on, Ayya had made
a point of washing the blanket himself, using large quantities of chlorine
bleach. Another time he served me food with his bare left hand, after he
had been eating with his right and there was no ladle and no one else to
serve me. "For now, this will have to be my right hand," he said.
All boundaries were movable. In the course of a normal day, if no one
else was available, Anni would clean the gutters, do the laundry and
dishes, and dispose of the babies' messes. The old grandmother would
make cowdung pies. The men would wash the children and chop the
vegetables. As often as not, a task that was started by one person would
be finished by another, whoever was handy. In terms of day-to-day activities, there was no sharp distinction between central family (those who had
permanent rights in the household), peripheral family (relatives who were
visiting but were not expected to stay forever), and servants. If there was
a dish or two to be washed, a child might do it, or Vishvanathan might do
it, or Anni or I might do it. If there was an errand to be run, Anni might
send Vishvanathan, or a child, or her own husband. When there were
vegetables to be picked from the garden, this job would be done by any
combination of able-bodied people: children, adults, central householders, servants. A typical crew consisted of Padmini, Anni, Ganapathi Nayakar (a neighbor in his thirties), and Antoni (a Paraiyar laborer in his
thirties). In the morning at 4:30 A.M., Anni would, without getting up, call

Generations

I

85

Plate 12. Ram Tilakam.

Modday the Nayakar servant, Ram Tilakam the Reddiar servant, and
Anuradha her own daughter, to fetch the water from the pipeline, which
was opened only at this time of day, while Anni herself went back to
sleep. After they had gotten the water, the three young women would sit
together in the dark and chilly courtyard, half awake, until dawn, when
the rest of the household began to stir. When there was no pipe water and
the women had to fetch water from the tank, Padmini, Mohana, and
Modday would go. Padmini would carry one pot, Mohana two, and Modday three.
Thus it could be said that all the people in the household did the same
work, but some of them did more. Likewise, they all ate the same food,
but some ate less. Therefore, though there were no lines drawn between
the tasks of different people, still there was an order which followed the
gradation of people by age, by degree of centrality to the household, by
caste, and by sex. The further down in this combined hierarchy you were,
the dirtier, heavier, and more voluminous would be the work that fell to
you, like sediment sifting to the bottom of a pond.

N°vt
1
o
U
Ì

§
X
E
JS

OS

I

T f*
O1 1
lo 1>
IO «
O
n

u

os
.5

•o
a
•o J3
O CO
OM
03 .5

1S3*

el
O

U
O

e

•g C/5

•a
3
co

>a

O

s-a

i3

eo
c
'5.

00

f

• S ">
13
O
Q<

S

u
.5
•a J3M
E a
am
-

es

e
'Ñ
co

u

OS
e
le

t
co

'

u « S
a ¡a &

& „ «

® S 2
o « .a
H ei B.

li™ ,8

o.
£
UH

Î

I

Generations

/

87

Plate 13. Children playing.
POSTLUDE: HOUSEFLOWS
" . . . where the honey fills the field . . . "
Tirukkovaiyar, 100.
Households in rural Tamil Nadu, like the body as some Tamil people
know it, are better seen as points of confluence than as "holds" in any
stable sense. In them, many currents meet, mingle, and redivide. They
are more turbulent and more dynamic than any of the streams connecting
them.
In a Tamil village, doors and windows are almost always open. Except
in wealthier places, most walls are crumbling; the narrow pathways that
wind among houses are filled with the rubble of crumbled walls. Animals
that no one owns—dogs, cats, rats, crows, monkeys, insects, reptiles—
enter through the infinitely permeable borders of a family's dwelling
space to receive the household refuse, or steal their share of the grain, or
stalk each other. People depend on them, summon them for cleanup, even
sometimes eat them. Offerings are made to crows. Lizards' comments
upon conversations are heard with respect.
Most houses are constructed of mud and thatch, so that they are very
impermanent. They must be rebuilt frequently or they disintegrate. Also,

88

/

Generations

most houses are tiny, sometimes less wide than a reclining person is long.
Many ordinary village families occupy more than one such shelter at a
time, so that in effect their "house" is broken up and scattered over several
neighborhoods. A poor man or woman taking a stranger through the
village will point out several distinct locations, referring to each as "our
house" (nam vldu). People easily shift residence from house to house,
perhaps sleeping in one and cooking in another, living a kind of micronomadism, their seasons the times of day. Many people spend more time
in the houses of neighbors than they do in their "own" house. Among
friends, different houses could as easily be one house. Mobs of children
surge through courtyards, restrained only, if at all, by the invisible walls
of their elders' structured antagonisms—spats between families, caste
prides and fears. Women sleep in their houses. Men stay with them, or
else they leave and sleep with other men in the village center. Some
people build their homes in the beautiful fields and orchards outside the
village nucleus, but most prefer to keep the living village wrapped around
them and twined through them, with others always very near. In empty
places there are ghosts and snakes.
Within a village there occurs a perpetual daily ebb and flow of people
through each other's living spaces. Superimposed upon this tide are the
seasonal and generational fluctuations caused by visits of kinspeople to
and from distant villages. A married daughter who lives with her husband
in another village returns to her mother's house for her first parturition
and often thereafter for months at a time. Children who quarrel with their
parents go to live at the houses of other kinspeople for a while. Old people
spend long periods of time in the households of their various children. In
a landowner's household, poor distant relatives come to live, work, and
be fed. Tenant farmers, laborers, and their families also come into their
patrons' living space regularly, to perform any task they are called upon
to perform, from removing dead rats to spending the night at the house as
protectors of the women to rocking the baby asleep in their arms.
The confluent, turbulent, ever-shifting quality of the household would
not be significant if it happened only for natural reasons. Tropical environments do encourage open windows and outdoor living and the growth
and multiplication of many creatures. Anywhere in the world, walls will
crumble. But confluence in the Tamil household, the close, tumultuous
merger of lives, is taught and learned as a value, and this makes all the
difference.

CHAPTER THREE

The Ideology of Love

PRELUDE: SURFACE AND DEPTH

On the surface is consciousness. Underneath is the unconscious, the deep
wellspring, the knower who is hard to know, who can never know himself. This the way we think of it. The surface, having been crafted by the
knower, is a face, a mask, an artifice, an obstacle, a lie. We have to get
behind it, underneath it, to understand what is really going on. Because
what is interesting is just what is hidden. If the surface interests us, it does
so only because of its failures, because of the artfulness of its deception,
which reveals the hand of the artist.
As anthropologists we are therefore simultaneously fascinated by and
suspicious of everything the native tells us. Everything is significant,
everything is revealing, everything is a lie. Our job is to lay bare the
structure of the lies. In ethnology we seek to reveal to the world the
nakedness of our informant, in its dazzling beauty, or in its ugliness, or
in both. Somehow we convince ourselves, often enough, anyway, that
this act of violence is an act of respect that benefits the native. At least we
have shown the world that his nakedness is comparable to ours. At least
we have shown the world what he really is, divested the world of its
myths about him, even as we divest him of his own. But of course, we
keep our own vestments on.
Let us try another metaphor. Let us not think of the person, the native,
as a sphere, with a surface to be stripped off or gotten through to the real
stuff, the contents. Let us think of consciousness, or better yet, culture
(how do we distinguish between these two ethereal constructions of consciousness, or culture?) as an activity—culture/consciousness as an activity not done by one person, but done among people, leaving its traces in
89

90

/

The Ideology of Love

memory (which we shall admit is a mystery), which will be part of the
matrix for the next cultural act, the next interaction. Let us say that culture
is in the interaction. After all, where else would it be?
Then when we view things this way, we find that there is no surface or
depth. Instead there is only the turbulence of confrontation, with ourselves as part of it, and this turbulence is the most interesting, because the
most active, thing. It is where the rocks get carved. We can study the
rocks later. Now let us consider the turbulence in which we together with
others are swept up.
In all this churning, surface and depth are commingled. Now our aim
is not to get to the bottom of things, but to stay afloat. Now what is most
important is not what we or others are, but what happens between us—
what others present to us, and how we receive it, and what we present,
and how that is received by them, and what comes out of it all, continuously, what is being formed, the eddies, the patterns of waves.1
PROBLEMS OF TRYING TO DISCOVER
WHAT PEOPLE MEAN

In this chapter I wish to describe some ways in which members of Anni's
family attempted to demonstrate to me some of the principles that they
regarded as important in the living of their day-to-day lives. I say "attempted to demonstrate" in order to stress the intentionality of their performances before me. One of the various things that they did, and that I
believe they intended to do, as they ate their meals, swept their floors,
recited their prayers, conversed with each other in my presence and with
me directly was to convey to me certain information about themselves,
about their relationship with me, and about their relationships with others.2 Sometimes these intentions were conveyed to me directly, explicitly, in so many words. Definitions of terms for my sake, explanations of
and comments upon behavior, one's own and others', to me as an ignorant stranger wanting to know, were common. More often, the intentions
behind actions were conveyed to me much more subtly.
I use the term "ideology" here to mean the articulable, and at least
sometimes articulated, ideas people have about why they do what they do
with respect to each other—in this case, why they express or act out
particular feelings or relationships in particular ways, or conversely, what
the feeling behind a particular act is supposed to be. Ideology, then, is
conscious formulation of motives and intentions. It is not "underlying"
but in a sense "overlaid." This does not necessarily mean, however, that
it is false. 3

The Ideology of Love

/

91

Plate 14. Jnana Oli and Ayya.
In living with this family one desire that I had was to learn what love
was to them. I had come to believe that love was something that they
thought about, or perhaps did not think about, but had "in their minds" in
some way. They had the word anpu, which seemed to mean something
very like English "love," and various related words, pacam ("attachment"), acai ("desire"), pattu ("devotion"). They had been exposed to
many formal teachings expounding upon and extolling love, and they
were surrounded, filled, and made into human beings by a culture that
said in a thousand ways that love was the highest good. But how was I to
grasp what love (or anpu) meant to them, and how was I to put it down on
paper in a believable way? If I offer a woman ten rupees for an interview
and she says to me, "Money is not important, people are important,"4 to
me that is a statement conveying more than a message about the relative
value, in objective terms, of people and money. It is also a statement
conveying information about the speaker, that she values people over

92

/

The Ideology of Love

money, and therefore (perhaps) that she is a loving person. But how do
I know that the intention to convey the latter message was "there" "in her
mind"? How do I prove it?
Ultimately, I can't, for no proof of another's intentions is possible. All
I can do is assert that my interpretation of this woman's statement was one
that would be accepted as a valid possibility by some Tamil people,
because those other people had explicitly linked such statements with
feelings of love. It is important to recognize, however, that the indirectness of this woman's attribution of lovingness to herself, the nonexplicitness of it, was essential to the conveyance of the message. In Tamil Nadu
you can't directly say, with any hope of credibility, "I am a loving person," for the loving are also humble. All you can do is show it.
In the ordinary course of affairs, people did not often talk about love.
They talked about what was to be cooked for dinner, or what one of the
children had done that day, or whether they should start plowing now or
later. Occasional indirect references were made to love. Even more occasionally, words for love and words of love were used. Yet acts of love,
including acts done in words, were as common, and as wrapped in cultural significations, as eating.
In this account of love in the family I lived with, I have deliberately
avoided trying to sort out the "sincere" expressions of feelings and intentions from the "insincere" ones. That would obviously be too hard a task.
But I also cannot claim that my account of what I experienced is free of
all subjective evaluation. I brought with me to Tamil Nadu my own,
deeply rooted, culturally developed feelings about what love is and
should be. These feelings ran head-on into the enactments of anpu that my
Tamil friends presented to me. My idea of love and their idea of anpu took
deceptively similar forms. My Tamil friends and I were attracted to each
other partly for that reason. I thought that they loved me. They thought
that I felt anpu toward them. But just at those times when I thought that
there was some fundamental something that all human beings shared, and
that I had found that something at last in Tamil Nadu, suddenly some
small act would cast a deep shadow between us again, and once again
they were strangers, whom I feared and mistrusted. I found myself thinking, time after time, "But this isn't love." Now, after years, I can answer
myself with detached amusement, "Of course it isn't love, it's anpu."
Somehow, back then, this relativistic answer never occurred to me.
The present account is not a description of anpu as seen "from the
native's point of view." Nor is it a description of love as it is expressed in
the Tamil context. It is a discussion of anpu as seen through the eyes of
someone conditioned to look for love: partly my own creation, partly

The Ideology of Love

/

93

those other people's. I was strongly attached to this family, I cared what
they thought about me, they changed me, now they are a little bit mixed
in me. To whatever extent I have incorporated them into myself, to that
extent this chapter speaks their feelings.
PROPERTIES OF ANPU

Containment (Adakkam)
Discovering the meaning of love to this family was rendered difficult by
the fact that for them, love was by nature and by right hidden. Ayya had
much to say on this, as on many other topics. Explanations of everything
flowed so easily from him that I have had to clap my hand over his mouth
at many points in this book in order to give others a chance to speak.
However, I have included observations of his which were particularly
revealing of his role in the family, or which were strongly borne out by
actions and statements of other family members. Of the hiddenness of
love, he said, "Anpu adahki peruki ninrum" [sic], which could be translated, "Love grows in hiding." Adahku means "be contained."
A mother's love for her child—tay pacam—the strongest of all loves
and the most highly valued, had to be kept contained and hidden. Anni
said that a mother should never gaze lovingly into her child's face, especially while the child was sleeping, because the loving gaze itself could
cause harm to the child. (She told me this when she caught me gazing at
my own sleeping child's face in just this dangerous way. When I told her
it was our custom to let people lead their own lives, she said simply,
"Tappu [That is a mistake]." After some time I learned that if you cared
about people, you would interfere.)
A mother would avoid looking with love at her sleeping child because
her look could produce kan drishti, "the evil eye," though for Anni it was
not an evil force so much as a merely harmful one. Anyone could gaze at
anything with appreciation, without the slightest malice, and harm could
come to that thing. But for a mother to gaze with love at her own child
was the most dangerous gaze of all. "Tay kanne pullatatu [The mother's
gaze is the worst]," said Anni and other mothers to me. Many women,
like Anni, would show affection for others' children, through affectionate
words and looks, but they avoided such shows of love for their own
children, especially in public.5 It was not the existence of mother love,
but its concentration displayed through the eyes, that was dangerous.6
Mother love had to be contained, not only in the sense of being hidden,
but in the sense of being kept within limits. Thus, almost all of the many
women with whom I spoke on this topic said that mother's milk should

94

/

The Ideology of Love

not be given to a child for more than ten months, just as a child should not
stay in the womb for more than ten months. Mother's milk was a special
substance because it was mixed with the feelings of the mother and transmitted them to the child. In particular, mother's milk contained the mother's love. After a child passed the age of ten months, mother's milk
would become very "sweet" (inippu) to him, and he would be all the more
difficult to wean. If he kept on nursing, women told me, he would get
"too much love." Then he would become fat and proud (timir) and beat
on his own mother. Thus, letting love overflow its bounds could be harmful not only to the recipient, but to the giver as well.
(This was in contrast to Ayya's idea that mother love, like mother's
milk, was a limitless good. Hence he said that a child should be nursed for
"at least three years." He himself had been nursed for five. Anni, arguing
with him, had said that a child would be a burden to nurse for so long.
Ayya had replied, "Is the fruit a burden to the fruit tree?" And Anni had
said, "After the tree had dropped its fruit, if you tried to tie it back onto
the branches again, yes, it would be a burden." Ayya was delighted with
this response, and recounted the story in his lectures.)
Other kinds of love had to be concealed in other ways. There was, for
instance, the convention of mutual avoidance in public between spouses,
a convention that Anni and Annan scrupulously honored, rarely even
looking at or talking with each other, while Padmini and Ayya exhibited
before others a relationship of total mutual abrasion.
It was not that sexual display itself was considered dangerous, or the
movie theatres would have been empty. Nor were physical expressions of
love forbidden. In everyday life, adult males and females who were not
spouses could show loving affection for one another with a casual freedom surprising to me. (Padmini and Anni, for instance, like to lean on the
shoulders of some of Ayya's visiting male friends, or lie near them and
gaze fondly into their eyes as they sang their devotional songs.) But
spouses, who were supposed to love each other most and to focus their
sexual feeling entirely upon each other, were expected to keep both feelings hidden.
No one ever said that the sentiments of sexual love should not exist.
Sexual pleasure (inpam, "sweetness") was not an evil force. It was one of
the four goals of life; any normal human being desired it. Sexual pleasure
was supposed to be gotten only through marriage. Marriage was not, as
it is said to be in some countries, a strictly economic arrangement. An
important part of marriage preparations in Tamil Nadu was going to "see
the girl" (pennaiparkka). The groom would be taken by some of his elder
kinsmen to visit the house of a girl ready for marriage. Usually at this

The Ideology of Love

/

95

point the potential bride and groom, if they did not already know each
other, were allowed at least to have a glimpse of each other, and the
question of whether they "liked" each other (pidittatu) or not was one of
those considered seriously when the final decision was made.
The significance of that first glance is made much of in Tamil literature. For instance, in Kampan's Tamil Ramayana, Rama and Sita first
meet and fall in love with their eyes. Souls are said to mix through the
eyes. The first sight of the potential spouse is a kind of darsharp—a
powerful emotional encounter and a transfer of spiritual and sexual powers. A woman could lose her chastity through such a glance—stories were
told of daughters who had been killed by their fathers for letting their eyes
meet those of visiting strangers. The eyes, like the sexual organs themselves, contained love, and the husband (kanavar, derived from kan,
"eye," and avar, "he") was the one to whom the eyes were given, followed by the heart. In the darkness of both, his image would be kept, as
the wife (manaivi, derived from manai, "house") would be kept hidden
within the house—in principle, out of love. Thus in our family, when
people talked about "being like husband and wife" (purucan
pondaddiyaka irukka), it meant being physically and emotionally very
close and going to bed together at night. But any hint of the existence of
such a relationship in public communications between husband and wife,
or by one about the other, was avoided.
The custom of a woman avoiding mention of her husband's name was
only part of a much larger set of conventions for hiding love. Not only
was the personal name of the husband never used, but if possible he was
never referred to at all. Only a very Westernized woman would refer to
her husband as "my husband" (en kanavar, en purucan). If a woman had
to refer to her husband, she would do so through a relationship he had
with some other person, as "the father of so-and-so" or "the teacher of
so-and-so." Some women would whisper and point when they wished to
make reference to their husband. Others would refer to their husband by
his caste name, as "my Reddiar." I asked Anni the reason for this convention and she gave her usual enigmatic answer to questions of this sort:
"Habit [parakkam]." Other women cited a belief that if a woman uttered
her husband's name, harm would befall him. One function of name
avoidance, then, was to wrap the husband in a protective silence, whose
nature and intent were nevertheless known to all.8
The husband was not the only one to whom reference was avoided.
Some men would avoid speaking their wife's name, referring to her simply as aval, "she." Ayya referred to his younger sister, with whom he had
been especially close in childhood, as "the teacher in the town of x,"

96

/

The Ideology of Love

where she lived, and it took me some time to realize that he was speaking
about his own sister. A Paraiyar man of twenty, whose mother was only
thirty-three, and whose father had deserted the mother and her children,
carefully avoided all reference to her, calling her "so-and-so's sister"
(naming his uncle) when he was forced to allude to her. Having been left
as the man of his mother's house, this seemed his strategy both for expressing and for denying his closeness to her. Anni referred to a good
friend of Ayya's, of whom she was very fond, as "brother from y,"
naming the man's village. Sometimes long-term friends claimed not even
to know each other's names.
The custom of avoiding direct reference to the loved one was fuzzy
around the edges. Only in the case of reference to the husband was this
custom more or less strictly adhered to by more or less all women. In
other cases, the application of this custom appeared to be a matter of the
speaker's own will. It was a tool used for one's own purposes and not a
ritual dictated by immalleable rule.
Another way of hiding love was to openly downgrade the loved one.
Thus, if a woman bore a series of children who died very young, when
another child was born it would be given an ugly name such as Baldy
(Modday), or Nosey (Mukku), or Beggar's Bead (Piccaimani), to protect
it. A beautiful child would have its cheek smudged with ink. If a child
was highly valued, to directly display one's high valuation of it brought
it danger, and so one had to make a pretense (which everyone knew to be
a pretense) of not caring for it at all.9 The same attitude could also receive
less conventional forms of expression. So a mother who had borne and
lost seven children (by her own reckoning) dandled the eighth, whom she
had adopted, by the roadside, playfully asking it, "Are you going to die?
Are you going to die? [Cettuppoviya?]," tempting fate as though the
child's life was of little concern to her.
It is possible that the custom among Paraiyar and other, mainly lowcaste, women of singing and speaking of their husbands in the most
critical, derogatory terms10 was motivated, at least for some women, by
the desire to protect the mates to whom they were in reality strongly
emotionally bonded, or even, perhaps, by a desire to show that they loved
their husbands and were protecting them. A similar motivation may have
existed among the many men who made a habit of speaking harshly to
their wives before others. "Don't reveal your treasure," said the poetess
Auvaiyar. So a rich man, to protect his wealth, might dress in rags. If one
regarded one's spouse as a treasure, one might best display one's regard
by hiding it, as one kept a treasured wife confined. Thus, while the
exterior of the relationship among spouses was almost universally mute,

The Ideology of Love

/

97

where it was not harsh, the interior of this relationship had sometimes an
exactly opposite quality.
Habit (Parakkam)
Love was often described as a force that was tender, gentle and slow. A
loving heart was a soft heart (menmaiyana manacu). A heart that was not
moved by the feelings of others was like a stone ("Make your heart like
a stone," a village man told me, when a drunkard came asking me for
money).
Food metaphors for the tenderness of love were many. Of all the
different kinds of food, sweet ripe fruit (param), whose coming into
existence was a gentle and gradual process, was probably most symbolic
of love. A mango (mamparam) was like a breast. You kneaded it between
the palms of your hands until the pulp was a creamy juice, then you cut
a small hole at the tip and sucked the juice out. In the story of the temple
of Parani, the goddess Parvati makes her two sons compete for a golden
mango that she holds in her hand. The older son Ganapathi wins the
contest, to the chagrin of the younger Murugan, but then Ganapathi hands
over his mother's mango to his younger sibling, saying, "Little brother,
to me, you are the fruit [param ni\." In Tamil Nadu it is a sin to cut down
a fruit-bearing mango tree, just as it is a sin to kill a pregnant cow. I
cannot help but think it significant that the mango tree is called ma.
Love, or attachment, or a sense of oneness with a person or thing or
activity, grows slowly, by habituation (parakkam). Unlike the term anpu,
the term parakkam was used frequently in our household, and was an
important and complex part of people's thinking and day-to-day theorizing about human behavior. Any addictive habit, such as coffee drinking
or cigarette smoking, was a parakkam. Ayya was fond of saying that he
had "no habits of any kind [enta vitamana parakkame illai]," a statement
meaning that he had no physical addictions; but this statement also expressed for himself and for others in the family what they saw as a more
general aspect of his personality, his lack of attachment (pacam) to any
human being. He stood apart (otuhki nitkiren) he said, and he selfdeprecatingly claimed that he had no love (anpu) in his heart, either.
According to popular theory, a person could become habituated to
virtually any state of affairs, and once a situation became parakkam to a
person, that person would not only feel comfortable with it, but would
seek it out if deprived of it.
Magazine and folk stories mocked human beings for their slavery to
parakkam. One story told of a beggar woman named Kundamma whom
a king fell in love with and married. The woman had been fat as a beggar,

98

/

The Ideology of Love

but as a queen she became emaciated. At last she told her husband, "Just
leave me alone in a room with my food from now on and let no one watch
what I do." The king agreed to her request and his wife again grew fat.
But one day he spied on her through a break in the wall. She had divided
her food into piles and was going to each pile in turn saying, "Please, sir,
I'm hungry. Give me some food," before taking a portion of the pile and
eating it. Her parakkam was to eat only food she had begged, and she
could not change it.
Another story told of a woman who sold fish for a living. Once she was
caught in the rain and was forced to spend the night in a flower vendor's
stall. She tried to sleep, but she tossed and turned because the smell of the
flowers offended her nostrils. So she took her own empty basket, which
stank of rotten fish, and put it over her head. Surrounded by the familiar
smell, she slept comfortably for the rest of the night.
These stories were repeated for amusement in our household, but
they in no way exaggerated what the family members felt to be true. The
idea of parakkam explained and justified the differences between people.
There was no point in trying to create a better way of life for others
because people liked and wanted whatever it was they were used to
having.
Once Anni and I were walking down a road in Madras when we saw
a hovel built under a bridge. "Even here people live their lives," she said.
"Like us, a man and a woman and children. They have a good life. They
don't have to answer to anyone [ydrukkum patil colla vendam]. We who
are in the middle, neither rich nor poor, must suffer many burdens. But
as for them, if one day they get two rupees, they live on two rupees. If
they get one rupee, they live on one rupee. If they get nothing, they go
hungry for a day."
"But isn't it hard to go hungry?" I asked.
"It is just parakkam," said Anni. "If I eat at a certain time today, I will
want to eat at that same time tomorrow. For them, going hungry is a
habit."
What you looked like and what you did showed to others what your
parakkam was, and hence, what you were. To counteract parakkam was
difficult, so isolated acts were considered rare. If a man was seen entering
a liquor store, he revealed that liquor was his parakkam. Black skin
showed that its owner's parakkam was to labor in the sun. To spurn food
at a wedding was to announce that your parakkam was to eat something
better. To give a gift was to commit yourself to a parakkam of gift-giving.
Young village men with urban aspirations said that they didn't know how
to work the land; it was not their parakkam.
Most parakkams were acquired by exposure to and absorption of cer-

The Ideology of Love

/

99

tain elements in the environment, but a parakkam was not a superficial
overlay upon a personality. It went deep in and at a certain undefined
point became that personality. So, for instance, northern Madras was
regarded as a dangerous place, because the people there were violent.
"Why are they that way?" I asked Anni. "Because fighting is a habit they
have practiced and practiced and that quality has grown in them [até
paraki paraki anta kunam valarum]," she answered. Through repeated
practice, through parakkam, an action would become a quality (kunam)
of the person.
So deeply embedded in the person was parakkam that it was not lost
even at death. Babies brought certain parakkams with them into the
world. That a child was born possessing certain knowledge (for example,
how to suckle), and more importantly, that children of the same womb
could have such different parakkams, was strong evidence for the reality
of transmigration, of there having been previous lives. If a baby had
parakkams, resembling those of a recently deceased kinsperson, people
would surmise that that baby had that kinsperson's soul (uyir). Most
babies were not assigned an ancestral identity in this way, and there were
no apparent rules regulating this particular kind of rebirth: the soul of a
male ancestor could turn up in a female baby, and vice versa, and it could
be born to any woman in the kinship group. But this kind of rebirth was
observed often enough for people to say that souls liked to be reborn
among their previous kin if they had any choice in the matter.
Hence the idea of parakkam was in some ways like the idea of karma
(vinai, pavam-punniyam). It was, and was created by, action; it was
embedded in the person and it was hard to get rid of; it was carried from
birth to birth and could be passed on from generation to generation. But
it differed from the idea of karma in at least one crucial way: without
parakkam, love was impossible.
From one point of view, as I have tried to suggest, parakkam was love,
or rather, it was the behavioral side of a reality that had also an emotional
component, as weeping consists of both sorrow and tears. Parakkam was
the reason for the growth of the feeling of love; love was the reason for the
continuation of parakkam. To know somebody, to spend time with them,
to be familiar or intimate with them, was to have parakkam with them.
When you had parakkam with a person, just as when you had parakkam
with a substance, that person became part of your system. This was why
it was so important to avoid going near bad or untouchable people, it was
important not even to talk to them, at least not too much or in too friendly
a way—because they might become parakkam. And then, as the six-yearold Umapathi had told me, "You would become like them."
Parakkam implied friendliness, easiness, grace, because an action to

100

/

The Ideology of Love

which one is habituated can be accomplished smoothly, and people to
whom one is habituated are not feared. Many people told me that villages
were easier than cities to live in because in a village people had parakkam
with each other, and in the villages people were kinder. "In the villages
they mingle lovingly [anpaka parakuvarkal]," it was said.
Harshness and Cruelty (Kadumai, Kodumai)
Parakkam was gentle and easy because its action was slow. Gradually it
built the powerful bonds of love. And love itself, powerful as it was, was
gentle and tender. Tender feelings (menmaiyana utiarccikal) flowed
(payum) most easily between people. Only feelings of love could melt the
heart (manacai urukkum).
But equally as it was tender and slow, love was cruel and forceful.
Cruelty was a characteristic of love acted out more often than spoken of.
However, some people said outright, "Love is very cruel [anpu mika
kodumaiyanatu]" or "Attachment is very cruel [pacam mika
kodumaiyanatu]," and I heard these two statements often enough to suspect that they, too, like the melting heart, were common formulae.
We on this continent consider love to be cruel in the sense that April is
the cruelest month. Our highest flights are made in love, and we take our
hardest falls there, too. Really, it is the disappointment of love that is
cruel, but since love is almost always disappointed, happy love songs are
not the norm. All of this is American common sense, I think.
But the cruelty of love had quite a different meaning to the Tamil
family with whom I stayed. Pacam, the bond of affection, was cruel, like
American love, because when the bond was broken, as always it had to
be, the newly unbound person suffered pain. When you become habituated to something it becomes part of you, and when you lose it, part of
yourself is severed. Hence the adage, Peyyinddumpirital kasdam, "Even
from a demon, parting is painful." Pacam was called cruel by a person
observing a child weep as her mother went out the door. But anpu, in its
meaning of a higher and unselfish form of love, could be cruel in its very
enactment, in and of itself.
Part of the reason for love's cruelty was that, because parakkam was
hard to overcome, it was sometimes deemed necessary to violently force
people to do what was in their own best interests. When times or situations changed, people had to change also. Hence Ayya's sister Porutcelvi, in describing how lovingly Ayya had raised her after their father
died, said, "He beat me to make me study [adittu padikkavaittarkal]."
Their father had not believed in female education, and Porutcelvi had
become accustomed to avoiding books. Similarly, Anni, in attesting to
the loving nature of an aunt who had helped to raise her, said, "She beat

The Ideology of Love

/

101

me to make me eat [adittu cappida vaittarkal]," after she had become
accustomed to denying herself food in another aunt's household. Beating
children in the hope of getting them to study better was an everyday
occurrence in this household, for small children's parakkam is to play,
but as they grow, they have to change, and ripening (paruttal), as Ayya
told me, is a painful process. Beating children to make them eat did not
appear to be necessary, except when they were sick. When people were
ill and their appetites were off, it was especially important to force food
down their throats, even if they gagged and vomited it up again. "At least
the essence [cattu] of the food will be absorbed," said Anni. Sickness
itself could too easily become parakkam.
Acts embodying the cruelty of love could also and simultaneously be
acts hiding its tenderness. Thus, physical affection for children was expressed not through caresses but roughly, in the form of painful pinches,
slaps, and tweaks, which left marks or drew blood. Frightening a beloved
child, like deceiving it, was also a favorite pastime. After my young son
Daniel was stung on the arm by a scorpion, Padmini suggested that we
buy a rubber scorpion and put it on his arm "to see what he would do."
Yet since his arrival in the household Daniel had been pampered, and, for
the most part, treated like a little king. In 1982, Mohana bore a second
child, who in 1984 when I revisited the home was a rugged, bold, and
healthy toddler. But she was for some reason terrified of a toy lion that
someone had bought for her. Mohana and Padmini enjoyed showing the
toy lion to the little girl and watching her scream. Yet the little girl was a
family favorite, not like a scapegoat or runt. Why were the household
darlings singled out for such exquisite torments? "It's a kind of love [oru
vakaiyana anpu]," said Ayya in response to my puzzlement at such practices.
Among adults, this "kind of love" took the form of heated noisy quarrels, which, however, blew over quickly and often terminated in laughter.
"You don't fight with those you don't love," said Ayya, and after some
time it dawned upon me that, inasmuch as love was in large part a matter
of mutual habituation, or, as we would say, interaction, then perhaps
intense love required intense interaction.11 The true sign of love's absence might be the absence of any interaction at all.
That my guess was not entirely wrong was suggested by my observation of an argument that occurred between Anni and Ayya while I looked
on. A cousin had come to the house to discuss a land dispute with Annan.
In Anni's presence, the cousin had said an obscene word, and Anni had
turned her back and walked away. After the cousin was gone, Ayya had
chastised Anni.
He told her, "When I say things that I should not say, you tell me,

102

/

The Ideology of Love

'Don't speak that way in this house.' The meaning of those words is,
'This is my house and I make the rules in it,' whether or not that feeling
is in your heart. In the same way, when Padmini or Vishvanathan speak
wrongly, you say, 'Don't speak like that in front of me,' But today, when
a person spoke wrong words on the front porch, you simply left. If you
scold the people of the house for speaking wrongly, you should scold
outsiders also."
Presumably, Ayya was criticizing Anni for inconsistency or for lack of
nerve. If anyone acts wrongly, he seemed to be telling her, you should
have the courage to tell them to their face that they are wrong. You should
not reserve your criticisms just for family members. At the same time (I
thought) Ayya was doing to Anni exactly what he was scolding her for—
because she was so close to him, he was singling her out for especially
harsh criticism. Moreover, Ayya himself had been present at the scene he
was now analyzing. Why hadn't he spoken up when the offensive word
was said?
After Ayya's lecture (which was much longer than my paraphrase of
it here) Anni had left, angry and hurt. Later, I asked Anni how she felt
about what Ayya had said. She answered, "In this world, money is everything. Those with money feel no need to respect those without it. When
someone from such a world brings ugliness like that inside, you can't
chew it and you can't swallow it [mennavum miuliydtu muruhkavum
mudiyatu]. You have to just walk away. But within the four walls of the
house, we are all one [nalu cuvarile ellarum onru tan]. If someone does
something wrong [tavaru], is it right or possible to hide it [maraikkalama]? We have a conscience [manacadci] and we must speak our
minds." Thus to honestly convey one's disapproval of another's actions
might be a sign of love for, closeness with, that other, even though it
could be misread by someone as close as Ayya was to Anni.
When mothers made their children cry, not in anger but in playful
affection, it seemed to me that some force other than a need for mutual
openness was at work. Or perhaps I should say, set of forces, because
childrearing is one area of life in which cultural, social, psychological,
and biological patterns converge, and find simultaneous expression in
single acts. We might count among biological forces acting upon the
mothers in this family the omnipresent facts of scarcity and hardship in
their world. You had to be tough, you had to be able to endure a lot, you
had to be able to absorb insults with equanimity, you had to be able to
bear without perturbation the sight of others getting what you knew you
deserved, in order to survive with your mind intact in late twentiethcentury India. To maintain your dignity, you had to be willing to give up
even your life and the lives of your loved ones, as the story of the family

The Ideology of Love

/

103

deity instructed. Our family was better off than most, but food was still
less than enough to go around. Toys, books, nice clothes—all these were
luxury items. So mothers in our family saw themselves as training thenchildren to be tough, and showed themselves in this light. Luxuries and
soft treatment should not become parakkam, they said. When a small
child learned to deprive itself, to say no to a tempting sweet, this development was reported with glee to others as a significant advance.
Related to the fact of scarcity was the necessity of sharing. The joint
family was, in part, an adaptation to scarcity. One roof and one hearth
were more economical than three roofs and three hearths. If you cooked
for ten, as I was told, you would always have enough for eleven. But the
great danger to a joint family was that it would fracture along the lines
dividing nuclear units—each pair of spouses with their respective children. Love, which naturally (iyatkaiyaka) was given to one's own, had to
be redirected across those lines. The stronger the love, the stronger the
force that had to be exerted against it, to drive it outwards. Consequently,
in our family, mothers deliberately spurned or mistreated their own children, forcing their own and their children's affection away from the closest blood bond. A mother might do likewise with a grown daughter, Ayya
said, harshly scolding her so that she would desire to marry, and so that
once she did, her heart would go to her husband and she would be happy.
For a child's own good, to "grow" a child, in the name of love or just
for fun, a caretaker might cruelly provoke love's opposite. As I was
sitting in the rice mill, reading poetry with Ayya, Padmini came running
to me laughing. "Daniel hit me with a stick," she reported delightedly.
"He took it out of my hand and hit me with it. I'm glad to see he's gaining
a little courage."
Daniel, who now as I write these words is fourteen, recently entertained us at a party with a discourse on his memories of Padmini.
"I hated her. It seemed like she was always picking on me. Once I got
so mad at her I broke the glass bangles on her arm and poked her with the
broken pieces."
"What did she do?"
"She poked me back. I had tried before to break her bangles but I
wasn't able to do it. But that day I was so mad I broke them all."
"Well, at least, Dan, she taught you something."
"What?"
"Anger makes you strong."
"Yeah, but it didn't do much good."
The Tamil family where Dan and I lived was a place of balancing
forces, and so was the world as a whole. The world as it presented itself

104

/

The Ideology of Love

to the senses, the world of the here and now, was baffling, deceptive, full
of maya. But as a totality and in the long run it all made sense, it all
balanced out. This family believed in karma, believed that everybody had
committed some sins in the past for which they would eventually suffer
punishment. It followed that if you wanted to contribute to someone's
future happiness, the best way to do it was to make them miserable in the
present and get the inevitable punishment overwith. The story was told of
a man who was forced against his will to kill a goat and grieved until the
goat came to him in a dream to thank him for completing a curse that had
been laid on a prince, to die the death of a sacrificial goat ten times before
he could be reborn as a prince again. This had been the tenth death. The
goat's murderer had been its unwitting benefactor. But if you thought
about it, you realized that life was always this way.
One mother (not of this family) told me, it was wrong to make a child
laugh because for every moment of laughter that the child enjoyed now he
would have to suffer a moment of tears in the future. As in the case of
mother's milk, sweet pleasures had to be limited, balanced by bitterness.
If hardship was a habit and had come to seem sweet, so much the better.
Dirtiness (Arukku)
Without question, to the members of our family, anpu was a good and
powerful force. One who had love was in a very real sense "higher"
(uyarnta) than one who did not. A loving heart was a pure (tuymaiyana)
heart. But love was often at odds with the demands of physical cleanliness
and purity (cuttam). It was not that love was intrinsically impure (acut•
tarn) but rather that in the presence of love, conventional purity did not
matter. This was the ideal of the ancient Saiva devotional texts, the ideal
of bhakti, and the members of our family, especially the women, lived it
to the fullest.
On a supraworldly level, love as pacam was a bond, and therefore an
obstacle in the quest for purity, which meant the breaking of all bonds.
Love as desire (acai) was even worse, because it provoked restlessness
(ialaiccal), which prevented the peacefulness necessary to the maintenance of a pure heart. Ayya had tried to teach me these principles in his
lectures.
But in regular life, things were viewed rather differently. A person
could be praised for having "much affection" (rompa pacam). A calf
taking its first steps would be described as "causing desire" (dcaiydy
irukkum), that is to say, being attractive. The trait in the calf, the feeling,
the person who could feel it, none of these were wrong to be as they were.
Indeed, something was wrong when the trait and the feeling were not

The Ideology of Love

/

105

there. The calf who was sick and unable to walk, the man who had no
affection for others, these were not as they should be.
The term anpu could mean lustful infatuation (as in the case of the
smitten demon, described below); it could mean clinging possessiveness
(an old woman who accused her octogenarian husband of having five
women a day was said to have had "too much anpu")- But more often it
referred to a certain generosity of spirit, as well as of pocketbook. In this
sense it was the opposite of acai, though in its broader sense it encompassed the latter meaning also.
What anpu never meant was extrication of oneself from others or from
the processes of life. Indeed to our family, and most of all to its linchpin
Anni, it meant just the opposite. It seemed that Anni was engaged in a
constant campaign to combat the forces of purity and to promote the
forces of love. It was she who allowed the lower caste servants to help in
cooking, defying the wishes of her mother-in-law. She herself engaged in
food preparation even during her periods, mixing the tub of lemon rice
with her bare hands. (Ayya had told me that if a woman during her period
touched a growing plant, the plant would wither; if she touched a metal
pot with her hand, the metal would corrode.) When Anni served me
dinner, she would set aside the serving spoon and ladle the rice onto my
leaf with her hand. When we went to visit a great Saiva temple and I
carelessly forgot to remove my son's shoes from his feet before we went
in, other people pointed and scowled, but Anni said, "It doesn't matter.
Let him be." When, in an attempt to formally interview Anni, I asked her,
"What are the most important things that a mother should know?", Anni's
first answer was, "How to suck mucus from a baby's nose." Later, when
my smaller son had dysentery, Anni was the one who washed his diapers.
One day, when I had finished eating, and Anni as usual had rushed to
pick up my leaf, I said to her, "You must like bodily effluvia [eccil\."
Anni answered that picking up another's leaf was an act of merit
(punniyam). I said that if that was the case, Modday the servant must have
a lot of merit. Anni said that she did. More often, however, when I asked
Anni to tell me why she broke the rules of purity that I had thought all
good Hindus followed, she would say, "These are advanced times when
all are one and no one is alone."
In this household, the defiance of rules of purity conveyed a message
of union and equality and was a way of teaching children and onlookers
where love was. So, for instance, when Anuradha was eating rice with
buttermilk, after she had eaten for a while and Jnana Oli (the two-year-old
son of Padmini) and Sivamani (the two-year-old son of Mohana) appeared, she called Sivamani to drink some buttermilk: she fed him some

106

/

The Ideology of Love

rice from her plate with her hand and then had him drink some buttermilk
from her plate. Then she had Jnana Oli drink some buttermilk from her
plate, then Siva, then Oli, until both said "Enough." Then she herself
drank down the rest.
Anuradha's feeding of the two little boys in this fashion accorded with
the many deliberate attempts on the part of older people in the household
to twin these children and foster love between them. Annan would often
seat the two boys opposite each other on his two knees, with a single toy
between them that he taught them to share. When the boys went out with
their mothers, each woman would carry the other's son. The mothers
themselves shared the kind of love that they hoped their sons would share.
Padmini and Mohana, who had grown up together, went everywhere
together, shared everything, and claimed to be "like husband and wife,"
often ate together from the same pot or bowl, alternating mouthfuls between them, in the same way that Anuradha fed their two sons. Watching
me watch them eat like this one day, Ayya, standing by, knowing my fear
of sickness, explained to me that eccil shared in love would not cause
disease but would cure it. People who love each other will eat from each
other's plates or leaves without thought of sickness. He said that he himself had never loved anyone that much.
Humility (Panivu)
Love was complexly implicated in expressions of pride and humility,
servitude and domination, possession and renunciation. Through love, all
these opposites were overturned. In acts of love, the humble became
proud, the servant became master, the renouncer became possessed. Just
as through love tenderness might be enacted as cruelty, so through love
hierarchy took ironic forms.
In a typical bhaktic reversal of the symbols of high and low, Ayya had
said in a lecture, "God is like a sandal, he is the foundation of all of us.
God is like a broom, he makes the world clean."
But Anni had gone beyond him in the bhaktic elaboration of broom
symbolism. Ayya and Padmini had quarreled and his anger with her had
lingered. He had not spoken to her in days. The whole household was
gloomy because of this. At the end of the third day, Anni had come
marching up to him with a broom in her hand.
"I thought she was going to beat me with it," Ayya said later. But she
had not.
"What is this for?" Anni asked.
"For sweeping," said Ayya.
"How often do we use it?" said Anni.

The Ideology of Love

/

107

"Every day," said Ayya.
"What would happen if we didn't?" asked Anni.
"Dirt would collect in the house," said Ayya.
"All right," said Anni, "Quarrels are like dirt. They come into the
house every day. Every day we have to sweep them away and start over."
Anni had used the broom, symbol of humility, as a symbol of forgiveness, forebearance, and patience (porumai, the strength to sustain, to
endure, to bear up) as well as of purification, harmony in the household,
and control.
Like the broom, sandals were a symbol of hierarchy, but their meaning
as a symbol was reversible. To wear sandals was a sign of high status,
wealth, pride, and in some circumstances, arrogance. To be without sandals, conversely, was a sign of humility. To be called a sandal, or to be
beaten by a sandal, was a grave insult. Harijans could not wear sandals in
the high-caste part of the village; human beings could not wear sandals in
temples where the gods lived. One could not wear sandals in a field of
growing rice; it would hurt the rice. One could not enter a person's home
or go where people were eating with one's sandals on; to do so would be
to show great contempt for the home or the food. The arrogance of the
British was shown by their custom of going everywhere in their shoes.
Aside from such interactional considerations, there were attributional
ones; in general people noticed whether one wore footgear, and if so,
what kind. Yokels went without sandals; sophisticates did not. Laborers
went without sandals; the educated did not. The poor went without sandals; the rich did not. Plastic or rubber sandals were much inferior to
leather ones, but to go barefoot on the streets was lowest of all.
Yet wherever they went, Anni, Padmini, and Mohana never wore
sandals. They were the only middle-class women I knew who publicly
went barefoot. I offered to buy them sandals. They refused. I tried to go
barefoot like them. They mocked me and said that my feet would not be
able to bear the hot sand and gravel, and they were right. They also lacked
other trappings of civilized womanhood, such as gold jewelry. Each of
them wore one glass bangle on each arm. Between them they owned six
or eight cotton and polyester saris, four or five silk ones (much fewer than
some individual landless laborers). They preferred polyester clothing because, in Anni's words, "it works hard" (uraikkum) and was fit for a
working woman. Cotton, especially homespun cotton (Gandhi's symbol
of humility) tore easily said the women and was an expensive luxury.
When Padmini waited for the bus, she sat down on the bare soil, as
only village women would do, and she teased me for standing, "as though
you're being punished," she said. Such behavior fit into the ethos that

108

/

The Ideology of Love

Padmini and her sister and cousin had worked out for themselves—they
were simple (elimai) by choice; and they were protectors, not in need of
protection. The spurning of sandals proved that they needed nothing between themselves and the sun-baked soil. When they went out, they
walked with their backs straight and their heads held high, and they took
long strides so that everyone could see their naked toes.
Ayya also often went barefoot. Friends would buy him sandals, and he
would slip them off his feet on the train to Madras and then walk off
leaving them behind. He lost umbrellas in a similar way. Finally he
determined not to waste more money on umbrellas and sandals and went
without either. His clothing consisted of two rectangular strips of thin
white cotton—one a waistcloth which hung to his feet, the other wrapped
around his shoulders. His friends and followers all wore shirts, trousers,
watches—signs of status, education, and ties with the city. Only on important religious holidays did they dress like their guru, Ayya. In his
younger days, Ayya said, he had also worn shirts, trousers, watch, and
underwear, but one by one these symbols of social achievement had been
discarded, and he, like the women, now kept little between himself and
the world.
Poverty and Simplicity (Erumai, Elimai)
At the time that I lived with them, the family was poor. Extra clothing and
jewelry would have burdened the household budget severely. Their
quasi-ascetic behavior might be dismissed as an attempt to make a virtue
of necessity, a concession to reality. But as it related to the ideology of
love, their attitude toward poverty had more aggressive meanings. For by
defining themselves as beyond the hierarchy established by wealth, they
negated the values that legitimized this hierarchy and so (at least temporarily and to their own satisfaction) turned it on its head.
In Tamil Nadu of the 1980s, status games were played in great earnest
by people at all levels of society, and wealth was by far the most important indicator of status. Families would commonly go deeply into debt for
the sake of conspicuous display. For most families who had a daughter to
be married, it was a matter of utmost importance that they celebrate the
wedding as lavishly as they could and provide their daughter with a very
large dowry. The custom of offering and demanding dowries had been
outlawed as a social evil by state and central governments, but the law
was unenforceable. Many young men saw it as their right to be showered
with wonderful gifts on their wedding day. Poor boys as well as rich ones
fantasized a postmarital paradise constructed of cinematographic delights. A prospective bridegroom looked forward to the day when he

The Ideology of Love

/

109

would have not only a jewel-bedecked wife by his side, but also a gold
chain around his neck, a watch flashing on his wrist, a stylish wardrobe,
a motorcycle, and more. Many parents, as well, measured the worth of a
new daughter-in-law by the money and jewels she brought with her at
marriage. If these gifts were less than what her in-laws hoped for, the girl
would be held to blame, perhaps mistreated. To make matters worse,
newspapers reported that "dowry-burnings"—in which young women
were immolated by their in-laws as a way of punishing their parents for
not coming up with the "promised dowry"— were occurring with increasing frequency. Though no one I met in Tamil Nadu was aware of any
local cases of girls being murdered by their husbands or in-laws for the
sake of money, still, the news reports from North India made everybody
anxious. People felt compelled, therefore, to spend as much as five years'
income on their daughters' weddings: the status of the family and the
daughter's future were both at stake, they felt. Those who had little to
spend in the first place were swept up (and cleaned out) by this tide,
equally with the wealthy. As one Paraiyar man put it, "Now all the poor
people are trying to celebrate their marriages the way millionaires do."
For a boy not to demand a large dowry was to devalue his own family, but
a groom's refusal of dowry could also be interpreted as a charitable and
honorable act. For a father not to offer a dowry with his daughter, however, was to invite shame (pari), the one thing that Ayya, according to his
own claim, feared most. The hardship that parents must undergo in order
to scrape up a dowry for their daughter and marry her "well" is often
interpreted as an act of loving sacrifice done for the sake of the daughter.
Feelings of love and feelings of pride are both expressed through marriage expenditure, even though many who speak of it call it an evil.
But when the family into which Ayya had married sought a husband
for the twenty-year-old Anuradha, they refused to offer a dowry with her.
"When someone asks us, 'What will you give?' we say, 'We give only
the girl [pen tan koduppom],'" Ayya declared defiantly.
Without a dowry to offer, they had to search hard to find a suitable
groom for Anuradha. I wondered if they would succeed. For those who
fail, there are excuses: the daughter does not "want" to marry, no groom
is good enough, the horoscopes never match. But these cannot counter
the strength of opinion that a woman can never be happy without a husband and children.
Finally a groom was found for Anuradha, in far away Andhra Pradesh.
It was a two-day journey by train. Frequent visits would not be possible.
And the people in Andhra spoke a kind of Telugu that neither Anuradha
nor her parents could comprehend. But Anni said the groom was kind.

110

/

The Ideology of Love

Smilingly she reported to me that he doted on Anuradha so much he
would never let her go anywhere without him (whether this was the whole
story or not I would never be able to know). "He is poor, but he is a hard
worker," said Ayya pleased.
In this context, money contrasted with higher things, with love, good
character, pride, and as long as the family was poor, so it would be. "We
are the poorest [among the landowning families of the village]," said
Ayya, "because we give the most to others, and all the people know it.
We are the most respected."
The family's relative poverty with respect to others in the village was
proof of its moral superiority. In the same way, individuals within the
family used their ability to do without to establish the superiority of their
love. Anni said, "Whatever Ayya does not need, we do not need." Since
Ayya did not drink coffee, she would not drink coffee. If Ayya refused to
go to the cinema, she would also stay at home. If Ayya bought her
nothing to wear, she would be content with her old clothes. There was
something more than submission in her simplicity, for she undertook it in
a spirit of hard-nosed boldness. Ayya called it tairiyam "nerve." It took
some courage, he said, for Anni to maintain her practice of loving selfdenial in public. When the women attended a wedding, barefoot and
unadorned, Padmini escaped reproach. She was the wife of a man who
had acquired the reputation of a renouncer, and it was only right (in the
eyes of many) for her to become a renouncer also. But Anni was subject
to scarcely concealed pity and scorn. A woman would glance at her,
touch her own ears, nose, wrists, and throat, turn her palms upward,
shrug, and project her lower lip, saying in the gesture language used for
messages that should not be spoken aloud, "This pitiful woman has no
jewelry." But Anni was not perturbed. Luxuries and sins were both, to
her, tevai illai, "not needed." Meanwhile, she indulged Ayya with yogurt
and ghee, expenses that he had tried to give up but could not resist, while
she herself never consumed them. Milk and its products were only for
children, she said.
In the matter of renunciation of luxury, Padmini followed Anni and
Mohana followed Padmini. It was a weakness, a sign of minority, to take
more and show that you needed more. Just as it was a sign of growing up
for a toddler to say, "No thank you," so it was a sign of being most grown
up of all to deny oneself more than others. Anni, being most grown up of
all the women, showed that she needed the least. She claimed that she
would only wear saris that had been discarded by the younger women,
because people would laugh at a woman "of our age" (mid- to latethirties) if she wore a new sari. Anni said Anuradha showed that she was

The Ideology of Love

/

111

"grown up," valarntaccu, on her eighteenth birthday, when Anni had
typhoid, and Anuradha had wept, saying, "I don't want new clothes, I
don't want a birthday at all as long as you are sick." To do without was
a matter of pride, a matter of seniority or maturity, and most of all, a
matter of love.
Servitude (Adimai)
Adakkam meant containment. It also meant control, both of oneself and
of others. One also contained one's beloved. Containment and protection
(patukappu) were both forms of binding (kappu), which devolved from
affection (pdcam), itself a bond.
The reciprocal of adakkam was adimai, servitude, the state of being
controlled by another, of being bound. Becoming adimai, like exercising
adakkam, could be a powerful expression of love. But if adakkam entailed pride, adimai entailed humility (panivu). If adakkam meant having
something to hold on to, adimai meant having nothing of one's own.
However as love turned acts of humility into acts of pride, so it turned
acts of servitude into acts of dominance.12 This reversal was particularly
dramatic given the generally low esteem in which the family held servants
as a class. Anni spoke scornfully of what she called "the servant mind"
(yelaikkdra putti). Ayya and others would also speak of the "slave mentality" (adimai manopdnmai—a term said to have been coined by C. N.
Annadurai) of Indians as a cause of their current inability to rejuvenate
their nation. Slaves and servants were the lowest of human beings and the
most severely shackled.
But a slave of love was a different matter. A slave to the love of God
possessed nearly unlimited power. In Tamil Nadu, and all over India,
there are countless stories of devotees who, through their love of God,
force God to do their bidding. And in human society, a servant of god was
a recipient of the highest respect. Members of Saiva sects in formal discourse would symbolically abase, and elevate, themselves by calling
themselves not "I" (nan) but "this slave" (adiyen), while the guru who
was nearly deified after his death would be called "the servant" (adikal).
But the transformation of servant into master was not dependent upon
reference to God or any sentiment of religious devotion. There was in our
family a pronounced feeling that servants could easily gain the upper
hand, a feeling exacerbated by the current shaky status of the family in
village politics and the intercaste conflicts in which they were embroiled.
There was an intuitive recognition of Sartre's dictum that in reality, the
master is the slave. Thus when I said to Anni that I felt she was treating
me like a queen, she replied, "A queen has no freedom."

112

/

The Ideology of Love

However, the servitude of love, as it was practiced everyday by Anni,
was more than potentially dominating; it was actually so. Her absolute
control as servant was epitomized in her role as family food dispenser. It
was she who decided who ate what and when, while if there was an order
to eating, Anni ate last. There would sometimes be quantities of biscuits
or fruit in the house, which Anni or one of the men would buy. No one
would ever help themselves to them or ask for them. Instead Anni would
dole them out, one by one. The children of the family were absolutely
under her governance with respect not only to what and when and how
much they ate, but from whom they were allowed to accept food.
Anni was notorious for her aggressive feeding behavior. It is a custom
in Tamil Nadu for women to heap food on the plates of guests even after
the guests are stuffed and vehemently refuse further servings. One gets
accustomed to this and eventually one learns to stave off incoming servings by putting one's hand over one's leaf and saying "Enough," very
loudly and with firm eye contact. But in this game, Anni was a more
formidable opponent than most. Trying to keep her from slipping two
more rice cakes under one's hands onto the leaf was a challenge of speed
and dexterity. Friends would joke that they were afraid to visit the house
because of Anni.13
I was often irritated by what I perceived as Anni's strong-arm style of
solicitude, but at a certain point I came to learn that in Tamil Nadu,
Anni's method might sometimes be the only way to get people fed. Anni,
Padmini, Vishvanathan, Daniel, and I were on our way to a wedding. It
was a five-hour train ride. We shared a compartment with a mother and
her child, and a man and a child accompanying him. The child with the
man was unwashed and poorly dressed. I asked the man if the child was
his. He said no, it was a relative's child. The people in our party ate the
food we had brought along. First Daniel ate, then I did, then Vishvanathan, then Padmini, then Anni. The mother and her child ate food that
they had brought. The man had disappeared somewhere; the child that
had come with him sat silently. Even when he was crushed between two
sleeping adults, he did not speak or move.
Anni woke up the adults who were crushing the child. She coaxed the
child to eat. When he refused, she called his guardian and told him to
order the child to eat. Once started, the child ate ravenously. Then the
other mother powdered the face of the child and asked if he had a mother.
The child said no. Anni said you could tell by looking at him.
Opposition and Reversal (Etirttal,

Puratci)

Love, as it was defined and enacted by our family, brought about reversals of all kinds. The closest bonds were concealed by denial of bonds,

The Ideology of Love

/

113

tenderness was transformed into cruelty, humility could be an expression
of pride, servitude a means toward mastery. All of these reversals had
their reasons, some of which were by no means culture-bound. Apparently reasonless reversals also took place. Nowhere could this activity of
love be seen more clearly than in people's use of the word "mother"
(iamma), the one word in the Tamil language more imbued than any other
with sentiments of love.
As a term of address, amma could be applied to the following people:
•
One's own mother, or someone in the category of mother, such
as mother's sister. So the children of the family called Anni "Annimma,"
and Padmini, "Pappimma."
•
A superior female. For such a person, amma was a term of respect and distance. Village adults wishing to show respect for me would
call me amma, even when they were older than me.
•
A female of approximately equal status to, or lower status than,
the speaker. Often in this case the use of the term amma was part of
hostile and sarcastic exchanges, as between sisters-in-law, or when a
husband was scolding his wife.
•
A male of equal or lower status than the speaker. When one
addressed such a person as amma, one was showing affection for him. So
Annan often called Ayya amma, and Anni addressed the male servants in
her mother's home as amma, in both cases with obvious affection. But
this usage of amma was one that occurred all over Tamil Nadu.
Conversely, appa, "father," was used as a term of affection for a
female of equal or lower status than the speaker. The very intimate, even
derogatory, terms -di ("girl") and -da ("boy") could be used in the same
way, so that a man might address a woman whom he didn't know very
well as "boy," to indicate brotherly friendliness towards her, while it
would have been completely inappropriate, and very rude, for him to call
the same woman "girl."
When I searched for an explanation for these customs, family members said they did not know. Ayya suggested that the reason was, "Love
does not know head or tail." This struck me as plausible, given other
aspects of the ideology of love in Tamil culture that I had learned. To
show affection for someone, you demonstrated in a conventionalized way
that you had forgotten what category they belonged to.
Mingling and Confusion (Kalattal, Mayakkam)
Love, then, mixed you up (mayakkum). A person who fell, as we would
say, head-over-heels in love with another, was suffering, as it would be
said in Tamil, from mayakkam, dizziness, confusion, intoxication, delusion. The same word was used to describe all these states. In all of them,

Plate IS. Daniel dressed as a girl by Anni, Padmini, and Mohana.
one lost one's ability to think clearly, or even to think at all. Then one
could not be blamed for acting strangely. And one could easily be misused by others. The intoxication of love was notoriously dangerous for
just this reason. A servant in a Brahman household jokingly said that a
Brahman girl learns to sing so that when a potential suitor comes to visit
and hears her voice in the other room "he will become confused [mayankuvan]" and marry her. Young men, and to an even greater extent,
young women, were vulnerable to mayakkam, which could be produced
by hypnosis or potions or spells as well as by the smell of certain flowers
or, as above, by music. As a person grew older, especially a woman, she
would be more resistant to mayakkam. Then she would be less in need of
protection.

The Ideology of Love

/

115

Love, through mayakkam, could make a person see exactly the opposite of what was there. The story was told in our household of a Saiva
guru to whom an ignorant low-caste admirer, out of great love, offered a
piece of raw meat. South Indian Saivas regard meat-eating as not only
impure, but revolting. At the same time they imagine that the lowest
castes especially relish raw meat. This is one thing that makes them low.
But in the story the guru to whom this foul offering was made saw only
the love, and blinded by this love to the physical realities of caste and
taste, ate the meat as though it were a ripe piece of fruit, much to his less
enlightened followers' disgust.
In a play shown in our village, the goddess Adiparasakti was created
to destroy a demon. This goddess was huge and green, she bit her bright
red tongue angrily, and she stomped about the stage wielding a sharp
trident. The demon in the play took one look at her and was smitten with
desire. He went home to tell his sidekick of the beauty of his new heartthrob. The sidekick at first was baffled. Then sudden comprehension lit
up his face and he nodded and smiled like an eager puppy. "Aha, ampu,
ampul" he said, "Love, love!" ("Ampu," the sidekick's dopey rendering
of anpu, also means "arrow." In this play, the pun was certainly intentional.)
Love as it was understood by our family not only reversed opposites,
but erased distinctions completely. There will be nothing novel to Westerners in this idea; it is important only that we realize that for the Tamil
family also, "mixture" (kalattal) was a consciously recognized attribute
of what for them also was the overarching ideal of love. This was the
meaning of Anni's reiteration that "we are all one," both here, "within
these four walls," and now, "in these advanced times." People's presence
with each other made them mix with each other, become used to each
other, become one.
It was impolite, because it was unloving, to treat oneself and one's
own with more favor than one allowed others, at least "within the four
walls," in places where love should prevail. To discriminate was dra
vancakam, "the deceitfulness of boundaries," that is, drawing lines. The
most polite, most loving pronoun was the first person singular inclusive
nam, "we" (including you). One used it, within the very innermost walls,
when talking in one's mind to oneself. One used it when referring either
to "my house" or to "your house." Both were called, politely, "our
house." Anni elevated me to the status of her equal by often referring to
"women of our age" (nam vayacu) and laying out the rules that we both
should follow. It caused members of our family distress when I used the
term "your children." All of them, including my own, were "our children," and if I needed to distinguish between them, I should refer to them

116

/

The Ideology of Love

by name. In the extreme, this mixture of yours and mine into ours became
reversed again—mine were called yours, and yours mine. So when I
wrote to Ayya's sister Porutcelvi that my second child had been born, she
wrote back, "I can't wait to see my new son."
This kind of total mixing, the sharing and trading of homes, of children, of selves, was necessary for the existence of love. So Ayya offered
an explanation of the Kannappan story, a story he returned to again and
again, of a devotee so loving he tore out his eye to use as medicine on an
image of Siva when he saw that the eye of the image was bleeding. Then
the second eye of the image started to bleed and Kannappan reached for
this own second eye, to tear it out like the first, when Siva stopped him.
Ayya said, "This story proves that God has no love. Otherwise he would
have recognized Kannappan's love from the first, and saved both his
eyes, not only one. It was only after Kannappan placed one of his eyes
on the image that God, seeing through Kannappan's eye, understood
Kannappan's pain.
"In order for you to understand my heart, you must see through my
eyes. In order for me to understand your heart, I must see through yours."

CHAPTER FOUR

Desire In Kinship

A NOTE TO THE READER

Getting through this chapter will take patience. Please have faith. Kinship
jargon and diagrams can look forbidding from certain angles, and perhaps
some readers, finding them here, may say, "Why is she doing this to us?
What does this have to do with anything real?" I will try to explain.
Tamils and neighboring peoples have a very elegant set of ways of
organizing their families and larger kin groups into patterned systems.
Any person trying to understand South Indian culture must eventually
come round to examining and trying to comprehend these elegant patterns
of kinship organization. They connect with many things that are happening in the South Indian world.
The kinship patterns to be sketched in the following pages are, moreover, important to us just because an enormous amount has been written
about them by Western scholars. These patterns are attractive to these
scholars for some reason. One reason I would suggest, a sad one, is that
we may, if we wish, study these abstract patterns just as such, as patterns,
without ever having to deal with real people, their demands, their suffering, their embarrassing similarity to our less-than-perfect personal selves,
the selves we try to conceal and transcend by means of our scholarly and
artistic productions.
The second reason—a happier version, actually, of the first, sad one—
is that these patterns have a kind of real beauty. I would argue that South
Indian people create such patterns not only because they "work," not only
because they perform some necessary social "function," but also because,
in their beauty, they give their creators pleasure. And we, if we try, may
find pleasure in them, too. Kinship patterns can be understood as objects
of artistic appreciation, in the same way that mathematical proofs or car
117

118

/

Desire In Kinship

engines are, for some people, such objects. Opening the hood of a fancy
sports car, some of us will see nothing but a confusing jumble of ugly
machinery. Others, who understand such things, will be perfused with
bliss. It is the same with kinship patterns.
In this chapter and the ones that come after, I try to show that kinship
organization is as much a matter of feeling as it is of thinking, or, to use
more scholarly words, that kinship is as much a matter of "affect" and free
form "aesthetics" as it is a matter of "cognition" and social "regulation."
I also try to show that there is a continuity between abstract patterns of
kinship organization and the lived reality of actual people on the ground.
To do this, I start with a discussion of the abstract aspects of Tamil
kinship and move gradually back down to the concrete. This note is here
mainly to cushion the shock some people may feel at the sudden ascent
from the cozy heat of the last chapter to the lonely cold of this one. But
be patient. Eventually we will come back to earth again.
SYSTEMS AND ANTISYSTEMS

" . . . two forms there in the endless sea danced . . . "
Tirukkovaiyar, 307.
The common denominator of most South Indian (and Sri Lankan)
kinship systems is the presence of preferred or prescribed cross-cousin
marriage: a man marries a woman in the category of his father's sister's
daughter, his mother's brother's daughter, or in a few cases, his own
sister's daughter. Some groups allow all of these possibilities. Most reported groups are said to practice marriage in one direction only: generally, a man may marry his mother's brother's daughter (this is called
"matrilateral cross-cousin marriage"), but marriage with the father's sister's daughter is disapproved. Much less frequently, the reverse type of
marriage, in which a man weds his father's sister's daughter ("patrilateral") is preferred.
Dravidian kinship terminology reflects and to a large measure helps to
constitute what is called "Dravidian kinship" by defining categories of kin
and by clearly displaying, through its own formal symmetries, the symmetries among these categories (figures 4, 5,6,7). The term "Dravidian"
refers to a family of languages spoken mainly in South India. The Dravidian language family is entirely distinct both in structure and in presumed
origin from the family of Indo-Aryan languages spoken in North India.
The Dravidian kinship terminology varies somewhat from region to region in South India, but within a given region the terminology is the same
regardless of what variant of the marriage system is preferred by a given

Desire In Kinship

/

119

Plate 16. Kolams.
group. 1 Moreover, though kin terms vary from language to language, the
overall semantic structure of Dravidian kinship terminologies remains
essentially the same throughout South India. Hence, for instance, in most
of the Dravidian terminological systems, a single term (e.g., in Tamil,
maman) denotes mother's brother, father's sister's husband, and fatherin-law; likewise, a single term (in Tamil, attai) denotes father's sister,
mother's brother's wife, and mother-in-law; a single term (in Tamil,

Figure 4.
paddi
tata
ammà
appà
attai
màman
akkà
tahkai
armari
tampi
purucan
marmivi
nan
maccàn
mocci
makan
makal
marumakan
marumakal
pèran
petti

Tamil kin terms.

Grandmother, spouse's grandmother, kinswoman of
one's grandparents' generation.
Grandfather, spouse's grandfather, kinsman of one's
grandparents' generation.
Mother, mother's sister, mother of any parallel
cousin.
Father, father's brother, father of any parallel cousin.
Mother-in-law, father's sister, mother of any crosscousin.
Father-in-law, mother's brother, father of any crosscousin.
Elder sister, female parallel cousin older than self.
Younger sister, female parallel cousin younger than
self.
Older brother, male parallel cousin older than self.
Younger brother, male parallel cousin younger than
self.
Husband.
Wife.
"I." (Used in the diagrams here to designate self or
ego).
Father's sister's son, mother's brother's son, male
cross-cousin.
Father's sister's daughter, mother's brother's
daughter, female cross-cousin.
Own son, son of same-sex sibling, own child's male
parallel cousin.
Own daughter, daughter of same-sex sibling, own
child's female parallel cousin.
Son-in-law, son of opposite-sex sibling, own child's
male cross-cousin.
Daughter-in-law, daughter of opposite-sex sibling,
own child's female cross-cousin.
Grandson, kinsman of one's grandchildren's
generation.
Granddaughter, kinswoman of one's grandchildren's
generation.

Parallel-cousins and Cross-cousins
Relatives of one's own generation are all classed either as parallelcousins or as cross-cousins, and are called by the appropriate kin terms.
Cross-cousins are considered potential spouses. Parallel cousins are
considered siblings, therefore not potential spouses. Whether a cousin is
cross or parallel may be determined by looking at the linking relatives,
that is, the line of people through whom one traces one's relationship
with that cousin. Add up the number of primary cross-cousin links in this

line (mother's brothers, father's sisters, man's sister's children, woman's
brother's children) and the number of spousal links (husbands, wives). If
the number is odd, the cousin is cross. If the number is even or zero, the
cousin is parallel. My sister's husband's sister is my cross-cousin. My
mother's brother's daughter's husband is my parallel cousin. My father's
father's sister's daughter's son is my cross-cousin. My mother's father's
sister's husband's sister's daughter's child is my parallel cousin. And so
forth.
Another way of looking at this is to say that a cross is like a minus and
a parallel is like a plus. Parallel times parallel equals parallel. Cross times
cross equals parallel. Cross times cross times cross equals cross again.
Spouses are cross and the children of opposite sex siblings are cross.
Siblings are parallel and the children of same sex siblings are parallel.

maccari) denotes father's sister's son, mother's brother's son, and wife's
brother; and a single term (in Tamil, macci) denotes father's sister's
daughter, mother's brother's daughter, and wife's sister (the latter two
categories are also often bifurcated into elder-than-ego versus youngerthan-ego.) This shared semantic structure strongly suggests a system of
bilateral cross-cousin marriage: in the ideal, two men exchange sisters in
marriage, and their sons also exchange sisters, and so on down through
the generations, so that the mother's brother's daughter and the father's
sister's daughter are the same person. Real life, of course, seldom if ever
matches this ideal. Indeed in Dravidian kinship it is necessary to speak
not of two but of three levels of ideal versus reality: level A is the bilateral
marriage ideal indicated by the terminology itself; level B is the preferred
marriage pattern of a given group, which is usually unilateral and which
therefore only partially fulfills the conditions set by level A; level C is the
set of actual marriages which take place. For this third level, what statistical information is available indicates that among groups who use a Dravidian kinship terminology, actual cross-cousin marriage takes place less
than 50 percent of the time, so that events taking place on level C only
partially fulfill conditions set by level B. 2 The same statistical information
shows, significantly, that when actual cross-cousin marriages do take
place, they take place between very near cross-cousins much more frequently than among distant ones: that is, it seems that a man in South
India is more likely either to marry his "real" mother's brother's daughter
or to marry a stranger than he is to marry someone in the category of
mother's brother's daughter who is nevertheless not close kin to him. 3
The statistical information is, however, quite incomplete, so that we may
only take hints from it, not draw firm conclusions.
One crucial feature of Dravidian kinship is that it allows for the existence of matrilines or patrilines or both simultaneously, within a single

o = a group of sisters

A—v—O = manied couples

A = a group of brothers

Q — A — ^ = sisters and brothers

Figure 5. One image of the structure of Tamil kin terms: A closed
circular pattern with radial symmetry (self as female).

s

•Jií ^J
^ S
S I

*o -oI
S s

z*

•s g
*

§

60
2S .c
•>• -C
?
-e a.
O c
t-v

S
s

.00

Il

II

Desire In Kinship

/

125

marriage system. Some South Indian groups are matrilineal and matrilocal. Most are patrilineal and patrilocal, but many of these are associated
with "secondary," named matrilines. Even where there are no formally
recognized matrilines, there often exist informal matrilineal groupings of
women of up to five generations in depth who are divided by alternate
generations between two households and maintain frequent and active
contact with each other. The female side of a patriline, consisting of
father's sisters and brother's daughters, may be equally solidary internally, and may also be solidary with the interwoven matriline.
Without departing from the fundamental pattern of cross-cousin marriage, a particular kindred group (in Tamil, vakaiyara) may change over
the years, or swing back and forth, or expérience disputes among its
members over choices between matrilateral or patrilateral marriage, patrilocal or matrilocal residence. Matrilateral and patrilocal marriages contribute to the solidarity of male and female patrilines by allowing all the
members of a patriline to remain together within a single household, but
through such marriages members of matrilines become dispersed over
separate households (figure 8a). Matrilateral and matrilocal marriages
allow for the continuity within a single household of male and female
matrilines, but patrilines are spatially dispersed (figure 8b). Patrilateral
marriages bring about similar conflicts between lines of men and lines of
women (figures 9a, b, and c). These conflicts, involving families of three
to five generations in depth, have powerful repercussions in the lives of
individuals.
Over the years, European and American anthropologists have spent
considerable energy in attempting to explain the persistence of the institution of cross-cousin marriage in places such as South India where it is
practiced. Most of the explanations that have been developed are functionalist in that they see the practice of cross-cousin marriage as fulfilling
some social function or human desire, thus contributing to individual or
societal wholeness. Many are functionalist also in the sense that they
regard the marriage system as bound up with other social and cultural
institutions, such that a disruption in the marriage system would result in
a disruption of other aspects of life as well, and vice versa. Holism—the
idea that any given culture/society is an internally integrated system,
complete in itself and self-maintaining—is a necessary presupposition of
functionalist approaches in either sense of the word.
Anthropological analyses of Dravidian kinship, aiming, as they generally do, for elegant and precise causal explanations of social phenomena,
are also characteristically essentialist and idealist in spirit. By calling
them essentialist, I mean that each published analysis posits one essential

A.

Patrilineal patrilocal.

B.

Matrilineal matrilocal.

Households
contain
patrilines.
Matrilines
dispersed.

Households
contain
matrilines.
Patrilines
dispersed.

C.

General pattern.

Marriage always
in the same
direction.
Matrilines and
patrilines
cross-cut.

Figure 8.

Ideal patterns of matrilateral cross-cousin

marriage.

A.

Patrilineal patrilocal.

Households
contain
patrilines.
Matrilines
alternate
between
households.

B.

Matrilinea! matrilocal.

Households
contain
matrilines.
Patrilines
alternate
between
households.

C.

General pattern.
Marriage
alternates
directions.
Matrilines and
patrilines
interweave.

Figure 9.

Ideal patterns of patrilateral cross-cousin

marriage.

128

/

Desire In Kinship

explanation for the kinship system as it stands, one cause for the one
effect, one reason for maintaining the institution which is equally valid
for all participants in that institution, rather than allowing for the possibility that different actors in different social situations may engage in the
same marriage game for a multiplicity of separate and perhaps even
conflicting reasons.
By calling these same anthropological analyses idealist, I mean that for
them, the behavior that is observed is considered to be an imperfect
manifestation of a perfect pattern maintained in the minds of actors, replicated identically in the unconscious of each, or copied faithfully in the
accepted ideology of each.4 Just as functionalism and holism are mutually
supportive forms of thought, so idealism and essentialism are mutually
implicatory: all are monistic; all negate the plurality of wills and desires
that make up actual human life.
Five approaches to the study of kinship in South India will be briefly
considered here. Thr6e of these are paths already taken: I choose to discuss them because they are the most well-trodden paths. The remaining
two are paths we have yet to take: I choose to discuss them because my
own approach, insofar as it accords with any general theory, is most in
accord with them, and I think they may lead us in more fruitful directions
than those that we have been following up until now. The five approaches
may be labeled structuralist, culturalist, poststructuralist, Freudian, and
post-Freudian.
Structuralist Approaches
The most famous modern analyst of South Indian kinship systems is
Louis Dumont, whose approach to an understanding of these systems has
evolved over several decades of fieldwork, writing, and heated debate
with other Western scholars specializing in Indian kinship. In a recently
updated version of some of his earlier theories,5 Dumont argues that the
Dravidian kinship system is at base an abstract organization of affinal
relations between categories of kin. The central assertion of this theory is
that not only relations of consanguinity ("blood" relations), but relations
of affinity (marital relations), are considered by Tamil people to be passed
on hereditarily from parent to child. These relations of affinity become
realized, as it were, in ego's own generation, as relations of "alliance"
between same-sex individuals. From his father a man inherits relations of
alliance with, the father's male cross-kin. Ego's father is in a relation of
alliance with ego's mother's brother. Ego, as the son of his father, inherits alliance with the son of the man to whom the father is allied, that is,
with the son of the mother's brother. Ego marries his mother's brother's
daughter as an affirmation of his alliance with this woman's brother. The

Desire In Kinship

/

129

institution of cross-cousin marriage, Dumont concludes, exists in order to
reaffirm, generation by generation, this hereditary relation of alliance
between categories of same-sex people.
Theoretically, as Dumont says, either categories of women or categories of men may be linked by alliance in this manner, but the examples
given in Dumont's ethnography indicate that the maintenance of an ongoing relationship between lines of males is really what is at stake. Dumont
stresses heavily that inherited alliance is a relationship between same-sex
people only: a child of either sex inherits relations of "consanguinity"
(i.e., relations with parallel kin) from its mother as well as from its father,
but it inherits relations of affinity (i.e., relations with cross-kin) only from
its same-sex parent. A man who inherits affinity with the men of lineage
B may marry the sisters of those men, but the relationship that he inherits
is a relationship with the men, not with the women. Heterosexual relations are thus completely bypassed as an element of the marriage system.
Also stressed in Dumont's schema is the principle that affinity in South
Indian kinship is a relation between abstract, conceptual "categories" of
people, not "groups" of actual people and certainly not pairs of individuals, such as "real" mother's brother (maman) and "real" sister's son (marumakari). In opposition to Radcliffe-Brown,6 Dumont argues that the
cultural relationship linking this pair of individuals is a matter of the
categories they belong to and has nothing to do with the relationship of
each to the woman who is mother to one and sister to the other. Indeed,
Dumont asserts, in South Indian thinking a man is related to his mother's
brother's daughter not through his mother at all, but through his father. It
is thus a mistake to consider, he says, that the relation one has with
someone in the category of maman is somehow an extension of the relation one has with one's "own" mother's "own" brother. Even though
there is in Tamil a terminological distinction between the "real" mother's
brother—(tay maman)—and a "classificatory" mother's brother—(plain
maman)—still for Dumont this is not enough to gainsay the view that
kinship is primarily a relation of categories rather than of persons.
The essence of South Indian kinship, in Dumont's account, is the idea
of affinity. This idea is an essence in that it is considered to be the single
most important principle upholding the marriage system, allowing no
rivals, and it is an essence also in that it is abstract. For affinity, as
Dumont describes it, is not a matter of experienced personal relations
between people. It is a general, invariant relation between, as he insists,
categories. Actual experienced bodily relations, interpersonal relations,
and especially sexual relations, are dismissed by him as trivial or nonexistent as far as the structure of the marriage system is concerned. Hence
the notion advanced by culturalists that theories about conception can

130

/

Desire In Kinship

Plate 17. Male cross-cousins cleaning their teeth together.
generate kinship systems is ridiculed by Dumont. Affinity is for him the
fundamental, the only considerable, value.
Dumont's thought on kinship, original though it is, is not without
roots. In particular, Dumont owes much to Lévi-Strauss's Structures
élémentaires de la parenté, in which Lévi-Strauss argues that rules of
exogamy (or, rules prohibiting intrafamilial "incest") exist for the sake of
creating social solidarity among groups larger in size than the single
family. Women are exchanged among families, rather than kept within
the same family, so that the various kindred groups among whom such
exchange takes place may be bound to each other by ties of affinity and
so integrated into a larger unit. Hence, as regards their role in marriage
institutions, women are much like words—they are tokens of communication and symbols of exchange. In a further elaboration of this theory,
Lévi-Strauss adopts an evolutionist approach to marriage systems, arguing that one institution can be expected to prevail over another if it contributes to greater overall social solidarity than does the other. Marriage
systems integrate relatively larger or smaller groups of people, more or

Desire In Kinship

/

131

less tightly or loosely. The wider the group that is integrated, and the
more tightly it is integrated, the more prevalent the system of integration
will be. Matrilateral cross-cousin marriage is more prevalent than bilateral or patrilateral because matrilateral can encompass all available lineages in a single circular or hierarchical system. Bilateral marriage is
conducive to intermarrying semi-isolates: two lineages trade sisters during each generation. Hence matrilateral marriage is a form of what LéviStrauss calls "generalized exchanges"; bilateral marriage is a form of
"restricted exchange." Patrilateral marriage is mediate between the other
two systems: lineage A gives wives to lineage B in one generation and
receives wives back from the same lineage in the next generation, thus the
two lineages form a partial connubium, though each requires also to be
affinally joined with at least one other lineage.
In Structures élémentaires, the topic of most concern to Lévi-Strauss
is the system of marriage rules, considered as an ideal, unconscious,
collective mental representation. Underlying the account of social organization as the artifact of a set of collective representations is the conviction, stated explicitly by Lévi-Strauss and inherited by him from both
Durkheim and Boas, that the so-called "native point of view," that is, any
particular individual's account of what is really going on in his own
society, is a secondary rationalization—not a true explanation, but rather,
something that itself needs to be explained by someone with a broader
perspective on societies in general, namely, the ethnographer.7 To a
certain extent, Dumont appears to accept this premise concerning the
falsehood, or at least insufficiency, of native explications of native life,
inasmuch as his account of South Indian marriage systems posits a key
collective representation, the notion of inherited affinity itself, which
receives no formal or conventional expression in the Tamil language.
Dumont does, however, credit conversations with Kallar elders (Kallars
were the caste that he worked with) with enabling him to develop the
theory that he does. If these elders, rather than Dumont himself, are the
source of the notion of kinship as based on inherited affinity, several new
questions arise. To what extent does the knowledge of these elders control Kallar social organization? To what extent is this knowledge shared
by others? And in what ways?
Culturalist Approaches
Some recent theorists, notably Kenneth David and Stephen Barnett,8
influenced by studies carried out in other parts of South Asia and the
world,9 have attempted to understand South Indian kinship systems in
terms of native theories of how the essence of a person, or the "coded
substance" of that person, is transmitted to other people. A central feature

132

/

Desire In Kinship

of such studies is the finding that in Tamil Nadu, rules regarding whom
one may or may not marry are consciously legitimated by some informants on the basis of statements regarding how coded substance, or
"blood," is transmitted, how it mixes with other coded substance, and
how it affects people's ways of being and acting. Rules governing whom
one may or may not marry, it is argued, derive from biological ideas
concerning which substances are inherited from which parents, and how
these substances are transformed during life.
In comparison with Dumont, so-called culturalists are more inclined,
at least in their surface representations of themselves, to be respectful of
"the native point of view" and to take "native" statements at face value,
as direct expressions of the symbol system that motivates human action
within the society in question. The trouble comes when there is a discrepancy among "native points of view," as of course there always is in India.
Then culturalist ethnographers, inheriting from their predecessors the
notion that any given "culture" is essentially unitary and univocal, tend to
escape the muddle that a plurality of perspectives poses by being highly
selective as to which "native points of view" they listen to.
Thus, Barnett and David's key informants provided them with wonderfully consistent, well-thought-out biological theories that accounted
perfectly for the institution of cross-cousin marriage in South India. One
such theory was that a person's "bodily essence" (udampu in Barnett's
account), or "blood" (rattam in David's account), was passed on to a
child from its father, and the spiritual essence, the "soul" (uyir), from the
mother, so that you could marry someone who was not related to you only
through males, or only through females, because then you would have
neither blood nor soul in common with them—in effect, an ethnobiological theory of double unilineal exogamy.10 Another theory postulated that,
as in Bengal, a woman's bodily essence was considered to become
transsubstantiated to that of her husband at the time of her marriage, so
that she would not pass on to her child membership in her natal patriline.
(Trautmann11 finds that this theory was originally propounded a thousand
years ago by the South Indian Sanskrit philosopher Madhava, in an explicit attempt to make South Indian marriage systems fit with the social
codes enshrined in dharmaMstra—a set of Brahman-authored texts written in Sanskrit in North India and dating from around 200 B.C. to 500 A.D.
DharmaSastra outlines the principles of social order as understood by the
texts' authors. Trautmann's finding suggests that the notion of transsubstantiation is, for South Indians, an after-the-fact justification of their
marriage system rather than the reason for it.)
Textual origins or no, these theories are no doubt valid for the infor-

Desire In Kinship

/

133

mants who offered them to the ethnographers questioning them. They
also mesh with other aspects of South Indian ideology. At the same time,
it must be pointed out that there are many South Indians who would
vehemently disagree with the theories of conception and heredity described above, and would offer their own counter-theories, just as seriously held, which might account for cross-cousin marriage in a different
way, or might fail to account for it, or might even contradict it. 12 What are
we to do with these? And what are we to do with the many Tamil people
who have no theories at all, and know of none, concerning the biological
foundations of their marriage systems? Shall we write off these nontheoreticians as blind followers of traditions whose reasons are understood
only by others?13
It is true that South Indian ideas concerning life processes are rich and
do relate at many points to South Indian ideas concerning social processes. And there are many reasons to believe that for speakers of Dravidian languages, substance, action, and feeling are not such radically separate modes of reality as Westerners seem to find them. 14 But, given these
vague generalities, particular points of view, particular expressions concerning the nature of life in South India are extremely diverse, and are not
at all simple. Often, as they are presented to the ethnographer, they are
fragmentary. Connections between system A and system B (e.g., marriage conventions and ethnophysiology) may certainly be found, but direct causal connections neatly pointed out by philosophically inclined
informants for the ethnographers' sake are far from all there is. This does
not mean that ethnographers should abandon interest in South Indian
conceptualizations of life processes. Rather, it is suggested here that they
should pay more attention to these conceptualizations in all their detail
and variety, and then should begin to consider what they explain.
To return to the question of essences, many statements made among
Tamil speakers about the nature of human beings suggest that it is wrong
to assume that for Tamils in general, or for South Indians, the person has
an "essence" at all.15 It might be more productive for us to imagine,
therefore, that Tamils, inasmuch as they have shared "beliefs" (another
problematic category), tend to think of each person as internally variegated and distinctive because of the patterns of variegation that that
person uniquely contains or displays. Moreover, the statements and actions of many Tamil people suggest that they think of these patterns as
changing gradually over time, and from relationship to relationship, in
complex and unpredictable ways—and that they think of them as having
many sources. There are some traits that are gotten from the mother,
some that are gotten from the father, some that are gotten from the envi-

134

/

Desire In Kinship

ronment—food, air, earth, water, stars—and some that are brought in
from a distant time and place by the soul, uyir. If there is a most important
component, it is surely this uyir, but of all the parts of the person, this is
the part that is least bound to the laws of substances such as earth and
blood. Uyir is breath, it is feeling, it is what makes a living thing move
and grow, it is what makes any live thing be alive. When a man and
woman make love, their very souls (uyir) mix in the places where they
have most feeling; thus one may lose one's life in the act of making love.
But the soul of a child is another altogether from those of its parents. The
uyir comes from God, most people say, or from some past life, or from
the air. 16 When the body dies, all the other components of the person
remain. Only uyir is gone, cleanly and completely, to who knows where,
having come in the first place from who knows where. Thus, the most
common and honest answer that unschooled villagers give to the anthropologist's how and why questions about the way people are is simply,
"Ennattai kandom? [Wha,t do we know?]." People are as they are. Idle
speculation about causes is arrogant and pointless.
Intellectual informants are often useful in such situations. Such individuals are able to elaborate fascinating theories for us on virtually any
topic, just as there are Tamil poets who for a fee will write poems on any
topic you choose to assign. We must respect these thinkers, for as natives,
they are more qualified to explicate the native system of thought than we
are. But they are a small, elite, and often (like us) an intentionally idiosyncratic bunch. They may make representations of the common man; but
they do not represent him. The common man is not in the business of
making representations; he is in the business of living. If we are trying to
understand the way the common man lives on the basis of what the intellectual knows, we must try to find the common man within the intellectual
and see how what the intellectual says relates to the actual living person
that he is, rather than attending only to the content of his words. Precisely
because the theories of Indian literati are so abundant and diverse, it is a
big mistake to take any one theory emerging from the mouth or pen of an
Indian thinker, or even many of them, and regard this theory as reflecting
the true shape of Indian reality, or even part of it. Each theory is unique,
and must be regarded as continuous with the unique personality that gave
it birth. 17
In advocating that we pay close attention to the details of what people
say, I do not mean to imply that structuralism, which seeks the truth
behind what people say, is invalid. To take statements at simple face
value, without seeking their place in larger and less easily visible patterns, is not only not wise, it is not possible. Hence, the account I give

Desire In Kinship

/

135

below is at base structuralist, inasmuch as it is about patterns, relations
between relations, and does not take isolated statements to be, in themselves, explanatory of whole institutions.
At the same time, in advocating a search for patterns that go beyond
individual statements and actions and perhaps are given no overt form or
symbol by those who maintain them, I do not mean to imply that the
"cultural basis" (read ideational motivation) for marriage institutions is
invalid. To claim this would in effect be to deny agency to people who
live by such institutions. Rather, the suggestions I make above are offered
as a warning that the meanings of kinship relations to people in a kinbased society are likely to be themselves complex, variegated, and not
internally consistent. They are likely to be more like what we call feelings
than like what we call thoughts. Their reasons are likely to be reasons of
the heart.
Dumont's account of South Indian kinship discusses "affinity as a
value." Culturalist accounts discuss the importance attached to the mingling of bodily substances. Both come close to, but skirt completely
around, the issue of feeling or sentiment (unarcci) as a crucial one in
Tamil thought and action about kinship. This is strange, for unarcci is a
central concept in Tamil thought about life processes and is also far from
marginal in any possible meaning of affinity to South Indians.
Both accounts also greatly downplay the significance of actual face-toface personal relations, especially relations between male and female, in
the operation of the kinship system. The nature of the connection between
body and soul, vital to Tamils, to their understanding of their feelings and
to their understanding of human relations, is similarly left untouched.18
But kinship is not only, or even primarily, a matter of relations between
categories of persons. Nor is it primarily a matter of relations between
physical components of persons. It is, I would argue, primarily a matter
of relations between persons, whole and actual persons. In their day-today associations with each other, they give the system being.
Poststructuralist (or Marxist-structuralist) Approaches
One helpful antidote to the idealism and naive holism of both the structuralist and the culturalist works discussed above is the poststructuralist
approach to the study of social organization put forward by Pierre Bourdieu in his Outline of a Theory of Practice. His book cannot solve all our
problems, but it does offer arguments that are very germane to the debate
over South Indian kinship.
Bourdieu, like Dumont, has much in common with Lévi-Strauss. He
builds on structuralism and accepts many of its premises, but then he goes

136

/

Desire In Kinship

beyond it and tries to reveal and seek a remedy for its flaws. Bourdieu's
most serious criticism of Lévi-Strauss concerns the latter's reification of
cultural "rules." Lévi-Strauss, as is well known, created structural anthropology overtly on analogy with Saussure's structural linguistics and
Chomsky's transformational grammar. Both Chomsky and Saussure
sought to find the invariant mental structures or grammatical rules underlying and generating actual speech. For both of them, all the vagaries and
unpredictabilities in the actual use of speech were epiphenomenal. Laws
and rules governing the structure of a sentence or of a language at any
given point in time, as well as historical change and "transformations"
taking place between deep or universal forms and surface or particular
ones, were all, for Chomsky and Saussure, quite beyond control and
manipulation by the individual human actor.19 The fate of human will and
agency and the particulars of context they treated as beyond the confines
of their discipline. Following their lead and bringing it to the study of
culture, Lévi-Strauss early claimed that "the demands of the rule as rule"
are part of the basi/: structure (unconscious) of the human mind, which
structure it is the aim of the ethnologist to uncover.20 The rules of social
structure and cultural order which Lévi-Strauss sought to uncover were
beyond time, even opposed to it.21 The beauty of "traditional society" or
of "pensée sauvage," in the view of Lévi-Strauss and many others, is
precisely that it is unconscious, wild, and natural like a pansy. It presents
an exquisite order, but no named individual or group of people planned
it: like Harriet Beecher Stowe's Topsy (whose persona reflects this
Rousseauvian vision), it "jes' growed."
In response to this philosophy, Bourdieu now asserts that we are misled to consider social organization to be governed by unconscious and
unauthored rules of which existing forms are imperfect realizations.
Rather we must consider any particular human world to be a process of
mutual creation of praxis and habitus. Habitus consists not of rules intrinsic to the human mind, but of patterns and tendencies which enter the
fabric of bodily hexis (the body's invisible nets and snares) from childhood. Praxis is not the mechanical enactment, or failed enactment, of
rules but consists of choices and strategies which are open-ended and
indefinite in number, and which depend for their meaning and effectiveness upon the elements of uncertainty and surprise. In Bourdieu's view,
rules of social organization do not "underlie" social praxis. Rather the
establishment of social "rules" is itself a practical act, a political strategy
carried out by particular agents and designed to legitimate a particular
social order. In effect, Bourdieu's work is a Marxist rethinking of LéviStrauss's dialectical but deliberately anti-Marxist structuralism.

Desire In Kinship

/

137

The scenarios and strategies that Bourdieu describes as intrinsic to the
real process of kinship (in Kabylia, Algeria, the place where he did field
work) are agonistic, pluralistic, individualistic. His approach is opposed
to what he calls the totalizing approach of structural-functionalism, in
which kinship is represented as a total system, self-enclosed, predictable,
with actors' uncertainty of other actors' responses to their actions treated
as inessential to the operation of the system. A totalizing view, as Bourdieu describes it, is a disinvolved, bird's-eye view of a society, the view
of an omniscient observer who already knows what is to happen as though
all were predetermined, a view taken off the ground and out of the time
in which actors live and make their choices. A totalizing view considers
kinship as the working out of an overall plan which benefits only societyas-a-whole, which precedes and is the basis of praxis, and which has
nothing to do with individual agency. Bourdieu suggests—and this is
crucial for our argument—that the very notion of "society-as-a-whole"
and of rules supporting the whole which have no specific origin other than
that of the collectivity or of God may often be nothing more than the
fabrication of particular interested parties who legitimize their hegemony
by representing themselves as embodying the whole.
Bourdieu's approach to kinship leads us to ask vis-a-vis Lévi-Strauss,
whether the apparently integrative property of kinship practice such as
mother's brother's daughter (MBD) marriage is really what causes this
practice to endure longer and to be more prevalent than father's sister's
daughter (FZD) marriage. Trautmann22 points out that of the various
possible forms of cross-cousin marriage, MBD marriage alone is in accord with the North Indian ideal of kanyàdàna as outlined in the dharma&istra. The principle of kanyàdàna ("gift of a virgin") specifies that one
should give one's daughter in marriage as one performs a sacrifice to the
gods, with no expectation of worldly return. Any kind of "exchange" of
women between lineages would therefore be a less sacred, and so less
prestigious, form of marriage. In modern Indo-Aryan communities,
affines who are "wife-givers" are thus sharply distinguished from those
who are "wife-receivers"; one should not give a wife to a lineage from
which one's own lineage has received a wife, and vice versa. A family to
whom one's family has given a wife is treated as superior to one's own
family; a family from whom one's own family has accepted a wife is
treated as inferior. Marriage is supposed to be consistently hypergamous.
Sanskritic North Indian culture in general has long stood as a prestige
model for high-caste South Indians, for principally political reasons. The
center of power on the South Asian subcontinent has long been the northern plains; the lingua franca for many centuries throughout the subconti-

138

/

Desire In Kinship

nent was Sanskrit. It would therefore not be unreasonable to assume that
the values of Indo-Aryan kinship have influenced the particular forms
taken by Dravidian kinship in the south, conducing to a preference for
M B D marriage, in which "the traffic in women" always flows in only one
direction.
For South Indians, the principle of kanyàdàna is much like the notion
of transsubstantiation of a woman's bodily substance to that of her husband at marriage. Both principles align southern praxis with northern
ideology but at the same time skew southern praxis in a certain direction.
Both principles justify a complete severance of ties between a woman and
her natal family at the time of the woman's marriage; both principles also
justify the complete subordination of a married woman to her husband
and his family.
As Leach and others have shown, M B D marriage supports relations of
permanent, irreversible inequality among lineages; it conduces to a hierarchical organization of lineages and so adds weight to the principles
authorizing caste hierarchy.23 Such a practice—consistent with the production of large social units integrated by means of hierarchy, rather than
with the production of small social units integrated by means of reciprocity—may be conducive to solidarity (therefore good for human beings)
in Lévi-Strauss's terms, but in Bourdieu's terms it is totalizing and the
"solidarity" it engenders may be no more than an oppressive illusion.
Why, we might then ask, should such a practice naturally, that is of its
own accord, endure longer than one that is conducive to looser, less
centralized forms of social organization? On the contrary, the latter might
more reasonably be expected to have a natural survivability, the survivability of any acephalous or decentralized life form, in which if one
portion of the system falls, the rest need not fall with it. If the more
encompassing (and arguably for this very reason the more fragile) system
is more prevalent, perhaps this is because, as a system which fosters
hierarchy, it is very often in the interests of powerful parties to promote
it. Perhaps when such powerful parties become less powerful, the most
durable institution becomes the one that is most flexible, the one that
allows for the largest number of alternative strategies of action—like a
well-designed board game in which the rules are few and simple but the
possible combinations of moves are many and complex.
Dumont's wide-ranging notion of "encompassment" takes on a different meaning when seen through Bourdieuvian eyes. To encompass, in
Dumont's terms, is to include, as the whole includes the part. It is also to
supercede in importance, as the interests of the society supercede those of
the individual. Dumont argues that encompassment in both senses is a
fundamental principle in South Asian society. Hence Brahmanical au-

Desire In Kinship

/

139

thority encompasses kingly authority because the Brahman represents the
sacred whole of which the king's realm is only a part;24 higher castes
encompass lower castes because the higher are more pure and whole, the
lower more impure and fragmentary;25 in Bengal the wife encompasses
the husband (bodily during intercourse) but the husband's patriline encompasses the wife (as a social being, for her whole married life), so the
wife becomes part of the husband's patriline and its interests must supercede her own;26 similarly in Bengal, the hierarchical love binding the
joint family encompasses the egalitarian love binding the nuclear couple
because the former is more inclusive, so love between husband and wife
must be kept strictly circumscribed.27 In South India it might be argued,
following the same lines of thought, that the hierarchy of matrilateral
marriage encompasses the reciprocity of patrilateral.28 In short, for India
overall, hierarchy encompasses equality, and the larger social unit encompasses the smaller, unless, as in the case of Brahmans within the caste
system or patriarchs within a lineage, the smaller social unit is considered
to represent the whole. But assuming a cynical stance we might ask, does
all this encompassment happen because Indians as a collectivity value
encompassment, or is it simply a matter of the more powerful making the
rules? Do women and untouchables value encompassment in the way that
patriarchs and Brahmans do? Why don't we ask them?29
Bourdieu's approach is useful to us because of its particularism and its
action-orientation: it discourages us from reducing a culture to some set
of presumably invariant and unanimously maintained collective representations, and therefore it encourages us to look more closely at the diversity of lifeways that actual people within a given society follow; it enjoins
us not to dismiss this diversity as epiphenomenal.
Where Bourdieu fails us is in his inability to see the diversity within the
human actor. For Bourdieu it seems that all action relevant to social
structure (hence to kinship organization) is motivated by selfish calculation of political advantage.30 It is for this reason, one presumes, that he
is so skeptical of the notion of solidarity, for he sees only the one side of
it—the hypocritical, oppressive side. It is good that we should be reminded that what we see as "diffuse, enduring solidarity"31 is sometimes
only tyranny in disguise. But we need also a way to understand the roots
of this solidarity when it is real, when it consists of affective bonds
between people, when it consists of actual feelings of love.
Freudian Approaches
If one searches for discussions of the affective elements of cross-cousin
marriage, and especially if one looks for discussions of what this institution means in terms of the feelings that particular individuals in particular

140

/

Desire In Kinship

kinship relations have for one another, much of what one finds is partly
or wholly Freudian in orientation. Freud himself, in Totem and Taboo,
was the first to suggest that rules of kinship organization were a consequence of men's need to deal constructively with Oedipal feelings. Since
then, Freud's thesis has been repudiated countless times by anthropologists, and yet Oedipus keeps reemerging in ethnographic studies of family
and kinship, especially in South Asian studies, in increasingly sophisticated forms.32
It would not be useful to recapitulate in detail here the debates within
anthropology over the relation of Oedipus to kinship. These debates center around questions of whether the Oedipus complex is real; if so, is it
universal; are the feelings of individuals really at the heart of kinship
organization; if so, do the unconscious and unacknowledged Oedipal
feelings of individuals form part of public institutions such as those organizing marital alliances; are affective ties between individuals able to
account for institutionalized relations between categories of kin; and so
forth.
Regardless of the stand that one takes on these issues one must still
confront the feminist objection to orthodox Freudian theory, which is that
it regards women as fundamentally wounded (castrated) and diseased
(hysterical). The application of Oedipal theory to kinship studies is likewise troublesome to feminists, in that it denies all agency to women. Men
and their feelings are given all the credit (or blame, as the case may be)
for construction of the kinship system. Are we not allowed to suppose that
women and their feelings also had a hand in this construction?
Of course, from the point of view of feminism, structuralist and culturalist accounts of kinship systems fare little better. Lévi-Strauss has been
severely criticized for his characterization of women in marital exchange
systems as essentially just pawns in the game. Dumont appears to be
responding to actual or potential feminist criticism when he writes that
relations of alliance are handed down from women to women as well as
from men to men, but his exclusive reliance on male informants and his
assumption of the primacy of male interests in the organization of kinship
relations render the balance he posits superficial and ad hoc. Culturalists
are still more sensitized to feminist interests, yet the kinship ideology they
describe is on several key points problematic for women while suited to
the convenience of men, and this bias appears to be accepted as natural by
the ethnographers in question.33 Bourdieu is to be credited for his detailed
descriptions of female behind-the-scenes manipulations in Kabylia wedding negotiations, but his evident assumption that the desire for power is
the one motivation behind all human activity may be criticized as funda-

Desire In Kinship

/

141

mentally masculinist in tone. The failure of all of these writers to deal
with the affective aspect of kinship relations has already been noted.
Exegeses of MBD marriage in terms of affect often take what might be
called a quasi-Freudian approach. In this view, it is assumed that a man
has a relation of affection with his mother and a relation of antagonism
with an older-generation male in authority over the mother and/or over
the younger male himself. Usually this authoritative and forbidding older
male is the father, but sometimes it is the mother's brother. So LéviStrauss predicted that in any society practicing cross-cousin marriage, a
man would have either an antagonistic relation with his father and an
affectionate relation with his mother's brother, or the reverse. The particular combination of lineality and locality (e.g., patrilineal and matrilocal) prevalent in the given society would determine which set of relationships would occur, and so would determine, in a society characterized by
cross-cousin marriage, whether marriage was normatively matrilateral
(marriage to MBD) or bilateral (marriage to either FZD or MBD).34 Dumont applied this rule to Tamil marriage systems, only substituting patrilateral for bilateral marriage.35 Similarly, Homans and Schneider posited
a universal rule of kinship which stated that MBD marriage would be
preferred in societies in which fathers had jural authority over their unmarried sons, and FZD marriage would be preferred in societies in which
mother's brothers had jural authority over their nephews.36 Much earlier
than any of these writers, Radcliffe-Brown, in attempting to determine
the value to the individual of MBD marriage in South Africa, suggested
that it is natural for a man, when he forms a marriage alliance, to want to
form it with someone who is like his mother—someone with whom he
has a warm and friendly relationship. This person is the mother's brother.
One extends one's affection for one's mother onto all of one's mother's
kindred, in particular the mother's brother, and thence to this man's
daughter, and so marries her.37 Building upon this argument, Homans
and Schneider suggest,
As he visits his mother's brother often, ego will see a great
deal of the daughter: contact will be established. As he is
fond of his mother's brother, and as mother's brother and
his daughter in the patrilineal complex, the Oedipus Complex if you will, are themselves particularly close to one
another, he will tend to get fond of the daughter. Their
marriage will be sentimentally appropriate.38
Radcliffe-Brown's "extensionist hypothesis," which posited that if
one had an affective tie with an individual kinsman, that tie could be

142

/

Desire In Kinship

extended to all individuals in the same category of kin, follows from his
fundamental premise that the basic building blocks of all social structures
are dyadic relations, that is, one-to-one relations between individuals.
This extensionist hypothesis is now generally rejected (perhaps wrongly
so, in the Indian case at least, as I shall suggest below), but the same
Freudian assumptions about relations between older and younger generation males and about relations between mothers and sons still remain in
the more recent and sophisticated studies.
In all of these formulations, the affective relation between mother and
child (whether son or daughter) is assumed to be invariant, and therefore
not a factor in kinship organization. Likewise in all of these formulations,
as in Freud's own opus, affect is not regarded as culturally constituted.
The person to whom one directs one's positive or negative feelings may
be seen to vary from society to society, but the quality of those feelings,
the nature of their expression, the possibility that affect is no more the
same throughout the world than is language—none of these matters is
given much consideration by these analysts.
Post-Freudian (or Semiotic-Freudian) Approaches
A major anthropological criticism of Freud, as I have just said, is that he
failed to consider affect or sexuality, even symbols of sexuality, as integrated into culturally organized symbol-systems. Yet this failure carries
over into anthropological applications of Freud, even the remote applications considered above. This, added to the antifeminine bias, the antihistoricity, the determinism, the monotony, the intolerance of ambiguity and
polyphony, the downright humorlessness that naive Freudianism shares
with the other approaches considered so far, might lead us to despair of
ever finding any theory that might assist us in developing a truly personcentered account of kinship (which, in case I failed to mention it, is what
this chapter aims to do).
But let us not give up yet. There is one more approach to our problem
that I wish to consider here. This is an approach which, to the best of my
knowledge, has never been used by anthropologists at all; it is the work
of the French psychoanalytic semiotician, Jacques Lacan. Like all other
fancy theories, Lacan's work has its problems, not least of which is that
it is almost impossible for the uninitiated to follow what he says—he
deliberately made it that way, ludic old fellow that he was. Fortunately,
a number of Lacan's feminist students have published lucid explications
of his basic ideas.39 With their help, through the stylish postmodern absurdities that riddle Lacan's work, I think we may find some real insights
that may help us to better understand the dynamics of culture, kinship,
and feeling.

Desire In Kinship

/

143

I call Lacan post-Freudian because his ideas about human psychology
are so different from what most people take to have been Freud's own.
However Lacan himself saw himself not as rejecting or transcending
Freud but as merely giving the most appropriate reading of him. In
Lacan's view, the topic of Freud's analysis was not the psyche (whatever
that is) but discourse, people talking. Hence Freudian theory properly
belongs, for Lacan, not in the realm of psychology but in the realm of
linguistics.
Lacan's work is already engaged with our own because it is informed
by post-Freudian French ethnography, most especially by the work of
Mauss, of Mauss's students Leenhardt and Griaule, and of Lévi-Strauss.
He is also familiar with many Indian texts, and makes reference to them
in his writing. In some ways, he "thinks like an Indian," and he behaves
like many an Indian guru, mingling the sublime with the absurd in ways
that cause some people to laugh, drive others crazy, and enlighten only
a few.
I must, therefore, insert a second warning to the reader here. Many
serious people say they hate Lacan, because he invents strange-sounding
words that make no apparent reference to anything in the universe that we
are familiar with, and because often he is so deliberately maddening. He
pulls the rug out from under us all the time. He is an academic trickster—
the most unsavory kind of trickster there is—and worst of all (for some
Americans) he is French.
Why then do I give him so much attention here? There are two reasons.
First, because his vision of the incompleteness of the self has a number of
interesting things in common with something we might call a Tamil world
view, especially as this world view is expressed in Tamil kinship patterns.
In other words, Lacan has hit upon some truths that Tamils have also
discovered. People of different civilizations sometimes do this, cultural
relativity notwithstanding. They harmonize with each other in interesting
ways. Why should we not hear the music?
Second, the angel voices that Lacan conjures up may seem like hocuspocus, but they are really no more so than any other academic theory. The
hocus-pocusness of all academic discourse is in fact one of the main
things that Lacan, during his life, was trying to communicate. Not that
there is anything wrong with hocus-pocus: it can be fun, and even illuminating, but when we take it too seriously, it blinds us and it shackles us.
Functionalism, structuralism, materialism, Freudianism, and all the rest
of our theoretical viewpoints are all very useful but they are not ultimate
Truth. In our "studies" of other people we must get beyond all these
theories, we must get beyond Theory itself, if we are ever really going to
understand those others. But getting beyond Theory is not as easy as it

144

/

Desire In Kinship

seems; it is no more easy than getting beyond Religion, getting beyond
Language. We need someone to push us off of it, push hard. Well, a
trying and crazy (but brilliant!) old man like Lacan might for some of us
be just the ticket, if he can force us to deal with the difficult and the
strange. For the worlds of people beyond our shores are difficult, they are
strange, they do defy the categories that shape our comprehension. And
yet they are not separate from our own world. We cannot ignore them; we
have to learn to live not only with them, but in them.
Here I will end my sermon and return to my text. I try in the next few
pages to give a clear and concise but faithful rendering of some of Lacan' s
ideas that bear upon the present enterprise—an account of Dravidian
kinship. Despite my best efforts, I know that many readers will still find
this section abstruse. So, if you really can't stand it, move on to the next
section. Otherwise, bear with me. It will all soon be over.
Lacan does not see in the material of psychoanalysis universal pre- or
transcultural symbols. For him, the self, like all other objects of experience, is linguistically constituted. Instead of calling it the ego or self,
therefore, he calls this core of each person's identity the "subject," to
emphasize its implication in grammar, its necessary opposition to some
"object," and its "subjection" to the larger whole which is, among other
things, language.
Being inherently a "part" of this larger hegemonic "whole," the subject/self is formed, in Lacan's view, not through processes of integration,
but through a moment of fragmentation. The Oedipus complex consists,
for Lacan, in the rupture of a primordial, static, imagistic, different kind
of wholeness, the wholeness of a being looking into a mirror, the wholeness—in Peircean terms—of Firstness and iconicity, the original motherchild dyad. The rupture is effected by something from outside of this First
wholeness; it is effected by an Other that is distant (as opposed to intimate), abstract (as opposed to tangible), arbitrary (as opposed to being its
own meaning), and unattainable. This powerful and alien Other is called
by various names: Logos, the Phallus, the Father, the Name of the Father,
Language, Culture. At the moment of rupture by this Other, desire enters
the self. The self now becomes Subject, for it now belongs to the father's
world: the world of Saussure's Arbitrary; the world of Peirce's Law. The
Subject gets a name and becomes a symbol, defined relationally and
negatively. It feels itself to be a fragment, to be incomplete, to contain an
absence. Language, the seeming whole to which the Subject belongs, in
turn belongs to another, to the Other, the divine will of collective social
authority. The Subject would like to appropriate this Other, and so redeem its wholeness, but this is not possible, for the Other both precedes
and outlasts the self. Language is already there, and one is already defined

Desire In Kinship

/

145

in terms of it, even before one is born (and the more so after one dies).
Even the unconscious, the foundation of the Subject, is nothing but "the
discourse of the Other." The mother was an object in the sense of being
something one could touch. The Other is an Object in the sense of being
something alien, feelingless, objective. The closeness and ownness of the
mother is replaced by the distance and untouchability of the Father.
The presymbolic vision of the self in the mother, or in general, in the
self's earliest objects, is what Lacan calls le stade de miroire, "the mirror
stage." The self imagines itself to be an image of an image (the baby sees
the mother and himself in her). This vision is static and closed, an eternal,
mutual reflection between two images. It is a mirage.
But, we are warned, the quelque chose d'un, the "something of oneness," the promise of oneness, that the phallus (or logos, or symbolic
order) holds out is also a phantom and a fraud. "Meaning," the seeming
goal and source of language, has no stability. It, too, is a matter of
relations, arbitrary and contingent, always shifting. Thus meaning, that
which is behind appearances, the "other of the other," which would be the
self again, the true and whole self which knows and owns itself, can never
be captured or appropriated.
The phallus, the distant, omnipotent paternal weapon that divides us
from the image of ourselves in our mother is, then, nothing but language,
the symbolic code or law. This code, like the Derridean "trace," perpetuates desire, sets up the illusion that there is something on the other side of
what we perceive that will complete us.
Spurred by desire for wholeness, the Subject acts. It seeks to possess
the Other (culture-as-a-whole, culture-as-given, culture-in-the-ideal), but
it never can, because this Other is only an illusion. Still, the self keeps
reaching for this illusory ideal. As long as it has this desire, it will keep
reaching. Through its reaching for the wholeness of the phallus/code, it
builds the human world. If its desire were fulfilled, if there actually were
closure—a perfect culture—and if the self felt itself to become whole,
then human life would end, everything would stop.
The phallic division of the self from the mother is "necessary" and
"functional" says Lacan, because in a sense it gets us moving, it puts us
into the semiotic order where the meaning that we are looking for is
always somewhere else. However, we must watch out for this "necessary" and this "functional," because they serve the myth of oneness, and
so they like it are frauds. In the final analysis, for Lacan as for Bourdieu,
the appearance of oneness, the very ideas of "culture," of "function," of
"whole," are authoritarian artifices, whose nonverity we must come to
terms with.
There is a positive side to this philosophy, though, which Victor Tur-

146

/

Desire In Kinship

ner, for one, approached in his notion of carnival. For Lacan what is real
and not illusory is what he calls jouissance, a term that can be translated
into English variously as "playfulness," "polymorphous sexuality,"
"bliss," or "female orgasm." This jouissance is neither an underlying
code nor a transcendent principle, nor is it meaningful, nor is it unitary.
It is not necessary in any sense; it is not a tool of communion or communication or the maintenance of any system. It is not even capable of being
spoken about. It is just there, "constantly coursing over the surface of the
body," not a complement or a completion, but a "surplus," a "supplement" and a "suppletion."40 Most importantly, jouissance has nothing at
all to do with "exchange" or "relations." Hence: "There is no such thing
as sexual intercourse," declares Lacan.41 Jouissance is a strictly private
matter.
Most of Lacan's biological terminology, it should be stressed, is completely allegorical. In his interpretation of the Oedipus complex, Lacan is
not concerned with the "real" father or the "real" mother or the "real"
penis, but with a set of forces considerably more general, intractable, and
abstract than these, for which forces such terms as "father," "mother,"
and "phallus" are only aides-memoire.
We can see in Lacan's ideas a rethinking of Freud's Civilization and its
Discontents and Totem and Taboo. We can also see in these ideas the
distant magnetism of Indian thought. The notion that the rupture of a
transcendent male consciousness into the primeval maternal equilibrium
causes the world to be created echoes Samkhya cosmology.42 The Greek
notion of logos, the unchanging, abstract, disembodied, divine law, is
much like (indeed historically related to) the Indian brahman, the Word
upon which the universe is founded, owned and controlled by a male
elite.43 Many Indian texts, from the Rg-Veda to tongue-in-cheek comments of present-day villagers, describe desire as a painful but creative
activating presence in the world, just as Lacan does.
Lacan's rejection of the notion of exchange as a plus-value in the world
of human relations is of course a direct response to Lévi-Strauss's opus on
kinship, as well as to Mauss's The Gift. Many feminist psychoanalysts
have been attracted to Lacan's work because of his stress on female
jouissance and on the goodness of its nonfunctionality; his criticism of
ideas of "value" and "exchange" (including the exchange of women) as
central to the meaning of kinship; his view that biological differences
between male and female do not determine psychological differences
between those labeled as masculine and feminine, but rather that biological features on the human landscape are merely arbitrarily chosen symbols
marking the initial division between self and (m)other. For all these reasons, Lacan's work may prove useful to us in the present enterprise.

Desire In Kinship

/

147

In a sense, Lacan's view does not contradict that of either Mauss or
Lévi-Strauss. The central principle of exchange, the principle that the
transaction can never be complete, that culture consists in people denying
their own completeness, men renouncing their possession of their own
female half, their own mothers and sisters, so as to become eternally
committed to an endless quest for wholeness through others—these principles are not negated by Lacan so much as they are described from an
alternative point of view. Lacan's vision might be considered to represent
the personal side of the social ideal that Lévi-Strauss describes. The principle of exchange—which states that you must find the completion of
yourself outside of what you already own, and that this process is never
finished—integrates society (if it does do this) at the cost of a sense of
perpetual incompleteness at any level lower than that of the whole society, including, and especially, that of the individual.
Lacan has in common with Bourdieu, beside his skepticism regarding
the whole, an intensely agonistic world view. For both thinkers, there is
a breach between a fictional totality called culture, rules, the symbolic,
the system, and an actual, willful, sentient creature called the subject or
self. For both thinkers this breach, and the uncertainty and incompleteness arising from it are what life is all about. Both thinkers are particularistic, antiuniversalistic, antiauthoritarian. For Bourdieu private strategies, for Lacan private sentiments, are at least as important as anything
public or shared.
Also like Bourdieu, Lacan falls into the very trap he takes such pains
to reveal. Bourdieu, as we have noted, never departs from his assumption
that power relations are all that enter significantly into the construction of
human societies. In this and other ways, his vision is as totalizing as some
of those that he criticizes, for in attributing sole reality to power as a
human motivation, he legitimizes those who pursue it, while rendering
invisible all the rest. Similarly, Lacan, for all his critique of ideals,
myths, and abstractions, never gets down to cases. He is himself a mythmaker, a formalizer and formulizer, a deliberately elusive and mysterious
father-figure, founder of what has been called a "cult." He has become an
exclusionist and an authority. He has become institutionalized. Ultimately then we must part ways with him as well—but not without having
learned from him.
There will be many readers, I know, for whom the psychoanalyticcum-semiotic view of the human condition outlined above will appear
totally useless and spurious. For instance, if one believes that what drives
human beings to act and to create is not some "spiritual" trouble but rather
the material conditions of existence, namely, the need to subsist and
procreate, then one must necessarily reject this and all other depth-

148

/

Desire In Kinship

psychologies as irrelevant to the social sciences. However, if one feels
that Freud did touch upon some fundamental human truths that may illuminate some of the regions explored by cultural anthropology, then I
would suggest that one should give consideration to the Lacanian reading
of Freud, bizarre though it may appear. After all, Freud's ideas themselves would seem just as bizarre were we not accustomed to them. Especially if we are willing to admit that human creative energy greatly surpasses what is required for the purposes of subsistence and reproduction,
that our creative energy is spent only partly in the service of strictly
material ends and much more in the pursuance of other kinds of needs,
and if we have observed that less material needs seem often to be pursued
even at the cost of survival itself, then we may be able to accept as a
working hypothesis that even something as seemingly utilitarian as a
mode of kinship organization may be created and maintained by human
beings largely if not entirely for artistic or existential reasons.
Synthesis of Theories
Building upon these considerations, we might describe Dravidian kinship
as, first of all, a set of variant cultural creations all oriented around a
single, unifying ideal, which ideal is never actually realized in practice.
Yalman calls this array of related kinship systems "variations on a
theme."44 The notion that there is some basic theme from which the
different Dravidian kinship organizations all spring seems strong. So
Trautmann argues that there must have been in the past a single Dravidian
kinship system, which one might call proto-Dravidian kinship, from
which all present-day Dravidian kinship systems may be seen to derive.45
This common ancestor may be reconstructed on the basis of properties
shared by its presumed present-day descendants, in exactly the same way
that a protolanguage is reconstructed from the modern members of a
language family, though none of the modern descendents replicates all
the properties of the protosystem. Trautmann posits that the unified protoDravidian kinship system he reconstructs was a historical reality. But of
course he would not claim that we could ever know this for sure. In a
sense, the unified protokinship system, like a unified protolanguage, is a
fiction or myth. It may be that Dravidian, for as long as "it" has "existed,"
has always been a family of languages with certain attributes in common,
and was never one single language.46 In the same way, Dravidian kinship
may never have been one single system, but always, as it is today, a set
of variant systems, no one of which matches the "protosystem" of bilateral cross-cousin marriage which the semantic structure of all of them
seems to presuppose. Perhaps it would be better, then, to speak of "metaDravidian kinship" rather than of "proto-Dravidian kinship." Or perhaps

Desire In Kinship

/

149

E.

Plate 18. Paddi churning buttermilk: a form of jouissance.
we could think of Dravidian kinship in terms of Wittgenstein's famous
notion of family resemblances, except that here the various related systems, rather than drawing upon a common pool or collection of features,
instead draw upon a common structure, so that the illusion of an overarching, or underlying, or ancestral unity is great.
Secondly, the Dravidian kinship ideal is a linguistic construct: it is a set
of words organized in a tight, symmetrical pattern, and defined in relation
to one another. This pattern is in some respects like a poem; its symmetry
gives it a certain aesthetic appeal. Ego or self is an intrinsic part of this
pattern, occupies a particular place in it, and is defined in relation to the
other terms.
A key, though hidden, feature in the pattern of Dravidian kinship
terms is marriage. The organization of kinship terms makes no sense
unless a certain kind of marriage is assumed. Ego takes his or her proper
place in this pattern, then, by marrying. (Marriage is by far the most
important ritual in Tamil Nadu, by far the most important event in the life
of the individual there.) By manying, ego upholds and seeks to appropriate the tradition created by his or her ancestors; by marrying, ego becomes part of convention; in Tamil Nadu, when ego marries he or she
enters fully into this central part of the Tamil language (symbol, to Ta-

150

/

Desire In Kinship

mils, of their entire cultural heritage). At the same time, when ego marries, he or she (especially she) is broken away from the world of the
mother, the primal world of shared bodies, which comes before words.
That marriage is indeed perceived by many Tamils as just such a break
from just such a world will be documented amply below.
It might be imagined that in Dravidian kinship organization, one
leaves, at marriage, one kind of unity (the world of the mother, knit
together by physical acts of love) to enter into another (the world of the
social whole, knit together by the language of kinship). But the harmonious, symmetrical ideal unity held forth by Dravidian kinship terminology
is manifestly an illusion. It is not just that the marriage-system mapped by
the terminology is only sometimes realized, so that we have the usual gap
between words and praxis, between cultural norm and statistical fact.
Instead, for any particular Dravidian kinship community, there stands a
third factor between the perfectly ordered semantic ideal built into the
language and the partly chaotic empirical world of actor's choices. This
third factor is that community's particular set of marriage rules, which
legislate that marriage shall be enacted within the community so as to
maximize the temporal power and religious prestige (the two are often
interconvertible) held by the community's senior males. The rule of
kanyadana plays a key role here.
Under the rule of kanyadana, marriage becomes defined as a father's
sacrifice of his daughter to the invisible (adrsta) world.47 The fruit of such
a marriage must not be the kind that can be enjoyed in this world that we
live in now. In principle what is being upheld through kanyadana is
dharma—the invisible moral order of the universe (similar to Lacan's
idea of the-name-of-the-father). In fact what is being upheld is the prestige of the father who gives away his daughter in such a marriage—in
exchange for the wealth he expends in dowry and elaborate marriage
festivities, he receives (in Bourdieu's terms) a large pile of "symbolic
capital."
Under the rule of kanyadana, marriage for the sake of bodily and
emotional pleasure (kama) is renounced. This renunciation, unlike the
other, is quite real, but here it is not so much the father, as the daughter
and her bridegroom, who (unwittingly) make the sacrifice. To the extent
that marriage follows the rule of kanyadana, and to the extent that it is
enacted as part of a system of exchange, to that extent pleasure (jouissance) is factored out of it.
But here is the third and final point that must be made about Dravidian
kinship: regardless of whether they get it or not, South Indian people,
both male and female, expect pleasure to be a fruit of marriage. They also

Desire In Kinship

/

151

expect personal and emotional completion and fulfillment to be provided
to them through the marriage system. People may rebel against a particular marriage, but they do not rebel against the principle of cross-cousin
marriage as they do, for instance, sometimes rebel against the principle of
caste hierarchy. Cross-cousin marriage is an option, a matter of choice,
in a way that caste hierarchy is not. If you marry a stranger that stranger
becomes your cross-cousin. The kinship system, unlike caste, bends to
accommodate the heart's desire, or seems so to bend, promises the hope
of joy, or seems so to promise.
The statistical evidence that South Indians prefer in real life to marry
either a nonrelative or a close cross-cousin (that is, someone whom they
know personally and with whom they may have a longtime bond), making little of the option they have of marrying a distant cross-cousin, hints
at the way in which the institution of cross-cousin marriage is taken as an
affirmation of personal ties, more than just a reproduction of categorial
affinities. For modern South Indians, cross-cousin marriage is, among
other things, a romantic ideal. They reach for this ideal, and yet they
rarely if ever achieve it, in part because it is always mediated for them
through the rules of temporal power, the rules of interested exchange.
The Approach Taken Here
My aim in the remainder of this chapter and in the chapters following is
to work toward an understanding of some of the meanings and causes of
Tamil kinship institutions as they are revealed through expressions of
sentiment taking place between actual people. For instance, we will consider what one particular woman says to and about one of her sisters-inlaw on the topic of how this sister-in-law is considered to feel and how she
makes others feel. Certain "myths" about kinship will also be discussed.
These myths are not treated here as abstract codes, for they are in all their
realizations, that is, in all their tellings, very particular expressions of
particular sentiments held by particular people. The meanings of a given
story—what is important in it, why it is told, what moral imperatives may
be derived from it—vary greatly from person to person, from telling to
telling.
In this approach, then, I attend as much to the private as to the shared,
as much to the particular as to the universal. In stressing the private and
the particular, one runs the risk of being accused of anecdotalism, and of
one's informants being accused of atypicality. But it is necessary to deal
with the apparently atypical in order to recognize that there are infinite
strategies, infinite ways of playing the game, and to see that it is not the
code but the praxis, not the iron rule of the ideal but all the failed attempts

152

/

Desire In Kinship

at its embrace, all the imperfect embodiments of its illusory phantom
nature, that keep the game going.
The main point I will try to make in this chapter, then, is that the
continuation of a particular institution such as cross-cousin marriage may
be posited, not upon its fulfillment of some function or set of functions,
but upon the fact that it creates longings that can never be fulfilled. It is
possible to see kinship not as a static form upheld by regnant or shared
principles, but as a web maintained by unrelieved tensions, an architecture of conflicting desires, its symmetry a symmetry of imbalance, its
cyclicity that of a hunter following his own tracks.
A secondary point I wish to make concerns the question of "extension"
of sentiments from one kinsperson to others—for example, the idea that
one might feel for all the men classified as brother the same sentiments
one feels for one's "real" brother, "by extension." This idea has rightly
been rejected as a total explanation of marriage institutions. It obviously
leaves too much unaccounted for to say that cross-cousin marriage is
practiced because an individual may fulfill his desire for his mother by
marrying his mother's brother's daughter, or someone in that category.
However, in considering kinship as simultaneously a linguistic system
and an organization of affect, I think that we would be equally in error to
reject out-of-hand the possibility that sentiments, like ideas, may be channeled by means of words. It is important not to overlook the fact that in
many parts of India, including Tamil Nadu, the selective use of kin terms
is a powerful way of conveying, igniting, or engendering certain sentiments. One may apply a particular kin term to someone who is not in the
genealogically "correct" relationship to one as a way of expressing a
kin-based feeling toward them. Conversely, when a certain term is applied to a person, convention dictates that appropriate sentiments be expressed, inappropriate ones suppressed. A dramatic example of the affective impact of kin terms occurred recently during the Sikh-Hindu riots in
Delhi, in which a group of Sikh men was prevented from murdering a
group of Hindu women by being told that these women were their "sisters."48 Less newsworthy, but still moving, instances of the affective use
of kin terms occur often in everyday life. A woman in her fifties weeps
because a neighborhood girl addresses her as akka, "older sister," a term
she has not been called by since her marriage. A man drunkenly making
his way home encounters a woman he knows on a lone street; the woman
backs away fearfully; the man replies, "How can you be afraid of me? I
am your little brother [tampi]"\ the woman loses her fear and continues on
her way. In a film, a man risks his life to save that of a woman he has just
met, crying out with great emotion, "If you are the sister of so-and-so,

Desire In Kinship

/

153

then you are my macci [MBD]." In a folksong, a man repeatedly asks a
woman for something to drink. First she responds by calling him "older
brother"; he says, "I don't mean that." Then she calls him "younger
brother"; again he says, "I don't mean that." At last she calls him mama
("mother's brother," a term of address for a potential marriage partner or
a lover); then he says, "That is the water I want."
Examples such as these could be multiplied indefinitely. Some detailed
cases of the affective uses of kin terms will be given in the text below.
The notion that face-to-face relations between individuals are in some
way the foundation of social structure also deserves reconsideration, especially if we are allowed to reintroduce the diachronic dimension into the
study of social systems and to think in terms of how each person as he or
she grows from infancy to adulthood learns to conceptualize and to act
within the social structure. We can easily imagine a child learning the
meaning of the term "older sister" first in relation to a particular individual, and then learning to apply this term, with the feelings that go with it,
to other individuals, and finally to whole categories of people. But the
association of this term with a particular dyadic relation will always be,
in both a temporal and a semantic sense, primary. Whenever I use the
word "sister," somewhere in the back of my mind there will always be
evoked an image of the first person I ever called by that name.
Individuals in what we might call a potential kin relationship with each
other—say, very distant "sisters"—might choose to realize and enact this
relationship, or they might choose not to. If they choose to enact it, they
may do so in many different ways. If they never see or hear of each other,
their sisterhood may not exist for them. But people who are engaged with
each other in some way, people who must face each other daily or who
require things of each other, must have some emotional stance toward
each other. When individuals are so engaged, their ability to act in their
mutual interest, or alternatively to defend themselves against each other's
incursions, hinges upon the sentiments they have for each other. These
sentiments in turn are given shape by what they call each other. Complex
feelings may be evoked by a familiar word, as much as they are by a
familiar face.
We Americans like to think of true feelings as free and spontaneous.
The idea of "conventional sentiments" seems almost oxymoronic to us. It
rankles us, seems phony. 49 Could a man feel that a woman is his sister just
because her position in the social structure causes her to be classified as
a sister with respect to him? Tamils, like us, often chafe against the
artifice and hypocrisy of relationships established by the force of convention instead of by choice. 50 And emotional dissimulation certainly exists

154

/

Desire In Kinship

among them just as it does among us. In spite of all this I would still
suggest that Tamil people can and in many circumstances do "really feel"
such structurally enjoined sentiments. Emotional patterns developed in
childhood among close kin are brought into play repeatedly throughout an
adult's lifetime. People replay their first loves and hatreds again and again
through countless successive relationships. The patterns are not the same
worldwide, but for each person, there are such patterns. I would suggest
that in Tamil Nadu it is just this set of patterns which are conventionalized
(i.e., overtly recognized and deliberately shaped in certain ways) and
given the names of kindred. As soon as a Tamil child can understand
words, it is taught, together with the names of body parts, the appropriate
terms for its kin.51 It is also taught in a multitude of crude and subtle ways
how to feel toward those kin. (The terms a small child is taught to apply
to people are chosen to suit the emotions the child is taught to feel toward
these people. The child learns genealogy much later.) How, then, can
childrearing practices fail to have a strong effect upon the deployment of
kinship strategies among adults? For it is just in childhood that the material for strategies, what we are accustomed to call "culture" and what
Bourdieu renames "habitus," enters the body.
In sum, this chapter makes two arguments. First, the continuity of a
kinship strategy such as cross-cousin marriage may be attributed to a
dynamic of unresolved tensions and unfulfilled desires as much as to the
fulfillment of some function or the resolution of some conflict. Second,
we can see kinship strategies as played out from the emotional habitus
acquired in early childhood within the domestic family. The tensions and
desires about which I shall speak all have their origins in the household
and in childhood.
The approach may be regarded as a feminist approach because it
stresses the importance of the particular, the private, the affective, and the
domestic, and because it considers the relations between males and females, and children's experience of these relations, to be largely constitutive of the social order. We have seen that the Dravidian kinship system
is generally treated by cultural theorists as a cognitive structure, and by
social theorists as a political one. At issue, on the one hand, are conceptual relations among categories, and on the other, relations of wealth and
power among adult men. When the same system is considered in terms of
its emotional consequences, and in terms of its effect upon the lives of
women and children, then we may see what should be obvious in any
case, that marriage patterns strongly interact with childrearing patterns,
and that these patterns just as strongly influence, and are influenced by,
the affective and political bonds that join the two sexes in battle or in love.

Desire In Kinship

/

155

Tensions between groups
1. Matrilateral—tension between matriline and patriline as interest
groups.
2. Patrilateral—tension between males and females as interest groups.
Tensions between individuals
1. Father's desire for continuity versus son's desire for independence.
2. Daughter's desire for continuity versus mother's desire for independence.
3. Love between opposite-sex siblings versus compulsory bond uniting
spouses.
4. Informal adoption negating the boundary between kin and affine versus formal marriage reasserting this boundary.
Figure 10.

List of cross-cutting desires in a Tamil household.

TENSIONS AND HARMONIES

The Exchange of Children Is as
as Marital Exchange

Important

People are shared among families, and the sharing renewed, through
marriage. When people are shared, they share their physical lives—they
see each other constantly, they work together, they listen to each other's
talk, they share food, they touch often, they make love. But the physical
sharing is important mainly because of the feelings that go with it, especially love, whose growth such physical sharing engenders. Marriage is
a ritualized, public, and formal sharing of persons and the materials of life
among families, in which men of the kinship group are expected to make
the final decisions regarding who is to marry whom, what materials will
be exchanged, when, where, and in what manner the wedding will take
place. There is another kind of sharing of persons, private and informal,
which is yet perhaps just as important as marriage, and perhaps more so,
in establishing bonds of love. This is the sharing of children among
women.
That the sharing of children among women is an ancient custom in
Tamil Nadu is indicated by the presence in Tamil Sangam love poetry of
the figure called cevili tay, the foster mother of the heroine. In this body
of poetry, only seven characters normally speak, so it is safe to say that
even two millennia ago, when this poetry was written, at least the ideal of
foster motherhood was of great cultural significance. The foster mother is
represented as having as much affection for the young heroine as the girl's
own mother, who also speaks from time to time in these poems. Modem

156

/

Desire In Kinship

pundits state emphatically that the foster mother was not a hired wet
nurse. Also important is the tori, the girlfriend of the heroine, not her
sister, but so close to her that sometimes they seem to be the same character, speaking in the same voice. Modern pundits consider the tori to be the
daughter of the foster mother.
In modem Tamil Nadu, it is common for a woman to take into her
house the child or children of one of her kinswomen and raise them as her
own for a time. There are no rules regarding how, or why, or for how
long, or with whom, this should be done. Sometimes the children are
orphaned or sometimes the adopting woman is childless, but this is by no
means always or even usually the case. Economic considerations are not
cited by adopting women as reasons for adoption. Inheritance rules do not
change by dint of informal adoption, and the child's own mother is not
necessarily any poorer or richer than the adopting one (the children of
poor relatives are sometimes taken into the house as servants, but this is
a different matter).
Why, then, do modern women adopt each other's children? Altruistic
considerations seem to be foremost. A Paraiyar woman with seven children of her own adopts the four children of a distant kinswoman who has
been killed by her (the kinswoman's) husband. The children are too
young to work and add to the family income. The adopting woman takes
them in at the risk of her own life, and becomes ill, possessed by the spirit
of the children's dead mother, when the father forcibly takes them back.
The wife of a rickshaw driver who has borne seven children and lost them
all in infancy adopts a girl baby found abandoned in a temple. She shares
the little girl with two of her husband's sisters, the child spending several
months a year in each woman's home. The wife of a college professor
takes into her home the children of her brother and daughter, so that the
children can attend better schools. A Brahman widow and her young
daughter live in the home of the widow's married sister. Also in this home
live the children of the deceased daughter of the adopting woman. And in
our family, the widowed Attai adopts two of the daughters of her brother
and the orphaned daughter of her sister, because her own son is grown
and she wants children in the house. The three girls had been adopted by
other aunts prior to their adoption by this one. All of the adopting women
I have mentoned here belong to castes that reckon descent patrilineally
and are virilocal. Most interestingly, in many cases, the adopting woman
is the child's attai, father's sister, so that a girl may be raised as a daughter by the woman who later becomes her mother-in-law.
Thus many children in Tamil Nadu grow up with more than one
"mother" and experience more than one household as home. The transi-

Desire In Kinship

/

157

tions can be jolting. Children may cry pitifully when their own mothers
leave them behind. But they may also develop a deep fondness for their
foster caretakers, which they carry with them into adulthood. For female
children, the system of child-sharing combined with the system of crosscousin marriage has as its most obvious consequence the likelihood that
a girl will not experience such a radical break in the continuity of her life
at the time of her marriage as will her North Indian counterpart. Instead,
there will perhaps be a series of small breaks occurring earlier in life,
which may nevertheless be strongly felt by children less than seven or
eight years of age. In a Tamil family, as I have observed above, the first
words a child is taught are kin terms, together with names of body parts.
It is important to get them right, to know from the start who is in what
relation to oneself. Oscillation between households might contribute to
the sense of contextuality inherent in kinship relations. A child felt as a
sibling early in life might later be known as a spouse, or potential
spouse.52 Under good conditions, membership in several households,
including the households of affines, might make a child feel more at ease
in the world. But for many small children, there is manifest anxiety
associated with the boundary between kin and affine, a boundary that
often coincides with the boundary between households. Such psychological boundaries may have to be crossed more than once as part of the
general process of growing up.
Four Important Bonds
The bond between generations, the bond between siblings, and the bond
between spouses, are likely to come in conflict with each other in any
kin-based society. At certain times in his or her life, these different kinds
of bonds are likely to pull an individual in different directions. As one
bond grows closer, another may stretch and break, and someone may be
left out in the cold. The trick is to have as many bonds as possible and
keep them all in harmony with each other, not let any of them break. In
Tamil society, for those who do not value conflict, the absence of any
bonds at all is one ideal. Positive bonds on all sides is another.
Within the nuclear family, four relationships seemed to be especially
important to the Tamil people whom I knew. These were the motherdaughter, father-son, husband-wife, and brother-sister relationships.
When I say that these relationships were important, I mean that individuals often expressed feelings of strong love for their opposite member in
any of these pairs, and that they also often expressed strong anxiety about
the actual or potential breaking of their bond with this person. Conversely, the same bond might be perceived as a powerful shackle and its

158

/

Desire In Kinship

rupture longed for. In Tamil, the term pacam denotes both affection and
forcible confinement, as of an animal for sacrifice. Among kin so bonded,
longings for freedom and longings for continuity cross-cut each other. In
all four of the relations considered here, there were good reasons for both
kinds of longing. In all four cases, both the love and the fear, the attractions and the repulsions, invested in the bond received stereotyped cultural expression. Here I will describe some of the feelings associated with
each of these bonds in turn, then I will go on to suggest how the institution
of cross-cousin marriage, with the particular meanings that South Indians
ascribe to it, builds upon the tensions among these bonds, the anxieties
and the unfulfilled or dashed desires that each of them gives rise to. The
tensions and anxieties, it will be seen, spring from problems that are by
no means confined to South India. The pattern of their harnessing, however, is perhaps uniquely South Indian, inasmuch as it is linked to South
Indian kinship organizations. I do not mean to suggest that the emotional
tensions sustaining these four bonds constitute the foundation of crosscousin marriage in South India, only that they together form one reason
for the continuance of the kinship process, one set of forces propelling the
cycles through which it moves.
A Man Sees His Son as a Continuation of Himself
(The father longs for continuity, but the son longs for
independence.)
The purpose of getting married, according to village men with whom
I spoke, was to have offspring, heirs (varicu). These were people who
would carry on the lineage, take care of one in one's old age, work the
land that one passed on to them, and see that one was properly buried and
remembered in yearly rites after one died. Daughters, however much one
cared for them, could not contribute to one's continuity in this way.
"They stay with you for ten years and then they're gone," said a number
of fathers. Ironically, the consensus among both male and female parents
was that daughters were more loving than sons, if there was any difference at all among them along this dimension. Daughters would welcome
their father into the house. They would ask, "Have you eaten?" Sons
would just say, "Oh, it's you."
But sons, and the love of sons, were crucial, because sons were proprietors of the two substances in which the selfhood of a village man was
most invested—his land and his seed. It would be difficult to overestimate the emotional significance of owned land to men who worked it and
whose fathers had worked it. From this land came their food and in it thenbodies and their ancestors' bodies might be buried.53 There could be no

Desire In Kinship

/

159

greater symbol of the substantiality and continuity of one's own body
than the paddy field with its precise but easily broken boundaries and the
precious supply of water running through it, easily stolen, easily lost. To
sell one's land was not only to lose one's livelihood, but to lose the
foundation of family pride for generations past and future.
As for seed, that is to say, human seed, semen, cultural constraints
prevented me from interviewing men whom I didn't know very well on
this topic. Fortunately, male anthropologists have done this job for me,
and there is also no dearth of textual references to this topic.54 Though
ideas vary, there seems to be almost universal agreement among Indian
men that semen not only makes babies but also is or contains a fluid more
vital than any other substance in the body, so that to "lose" an excessive
quantity of semen is a life-threatening event. Semen as a substance is very
closely associated with the idea of the soul that survives after death (uyir,
anma, jivan) and in many contexts is identified with it. Though it is often
said that females too possess semen, the identity and activity of this
female seed is mysterious. It is sometimes said to be menstrual blood,
which is a substance of a very different nature from male semen. In
general, when people talk about semen (vittu, intiriyam, jiva sakti), they
are talking specifically about the male ejaculate. The people who express
concern or anxiety over what happens to their semen are males.55 Thus
sons receive and carry on the seed and soul-stuff of their fathers in a way
that daughters cannot.
Beyond the land and beyond the seed, the spiritual fate of the father is
in the hands of the son. In lower caste priestly and shamanic families
(Ampalakkarars, Paraiyars, Velars) around Madurai, the family deity is
passed on through possession or dreams or the choice of the father to the
most worthy or eldest son or grandson. In some households, the family
deity is all but forgotten, but in others, this deity is a vital presence with
whom the head of the family strongly identifies and whose will is sought
whenever there is a family crisis. When it comes in dreams, it might come
in the form of the deceased father or grandfather.56
The son not only continues the father's spirit, he has the capacity to be
both its liberator and its protector. It is interesting in this regard that the
most popular male gods in Tamil Nadu—Kannan, Murugan, Ayyappan,
Pillaiyar—are all children, sons, the majority of whose worshippers are
men. A main function of these deities is the removal and forgiveness of
sin and similar burdens. Hair, that fertile pollutant, is offered to Murugan. Some men grow beards and heads of long hair to shave off and offer
to him. Then, some say, it is as though all the unhappiness they have
experienced during the time the hair was growing is lifted from them. On

Plate 19.

Annan and Jnana Oli supervise transplanting.

pilgrimages to the mountain temples of Murugan, devotees may carry
large decorated structures called kavadis attached to their bodies with fish
hooks. The structure is intended to make the devotee similar to Murugan's vehicle, the peacock. The devotee removes this heavy burden and
offers it to Murugan when he reaches the mountaintop shrine. Similarly,
there is an annual, men-only pilgrimage to the mountaintop shrine of the
boy-god Ayyappan. The devotees must endure much hardship before
reaching their goal. They are said to be following in the footsteps of an
evil elder man who tried to take the young god's life and subsequently
repented. As they travel up the mountain, the devotees chant "Caranam
caranam Ayyappa [Refuge, refuge, Ayyappa]." A song incorporating
this chant is expremely popular in modern Tamil Nadu. 57

Desire In Kinship

/

161

Pillaiyar, too, may be a forgiver or remover of sin. Pillaiyar is the
elephant-headed god. His name means "son" or "child." For reasons I do
not know, worshippers commonly greet Pillaiyar by means of a conventionalized gesture of apology—they cross their arms, tug their ears, and
slightly bend their knees up and down several times. Pillaiyar will forgive
them for whatever wrong they have done. He will also remove the obstacles to their happiness, whatever these may be. Whenever an enterprise
is begun, Pillaiyar must be worshipped first.
One of the most important deities in the village near Madurai where I
worked was called Vinai Tirkkum Vinayakar ("Vinayakar who ends
karma"; Vinayakar is another name of Pillaiyar). He was supposed to
have lifted a curse from the village which was causing all the children
there to die. The man who told me this god's story, and who was a great
devotee of Vinai Tirkkum Vinayakar, was one whose only son had killed
himself because the father had not consented to let him marry the woman
that he loved. This father also confessed to all that he had beaten his wife
during her pregnancy with this son and so considered himself to be the
cause of her subsequent deafness. I believe that the father was seeking his
son's and wife's forgiveness, and removal of the burden of his sorrow,
through his worship of Pillaiyar. This would be an apt penance, for Pillaiyar himself in the story of his origin was murdered by his father.
Pillaiyar is the prime example of an Indian mythic type that A. K.
Ramanujan calls the Indian Oedipus.58 In Indian Oedipus stories, rather
than the son murdering the father, the father murders the son—and then
repents. In the origin story of Pillaiyar, Siva's wife Parvati decides she
wants a child of her very own, who will be answerable only to her. She
creates Pillaiyar out of her own bodily substance. The little boy then does
as she says and prevents Siva from interrupting her during her bath. In
another version of this myth, he sleeps with her. Siva jealously beheads
him. Parvati is so enraged that she threatens to destroy the whole universe. Contrite and terrified, Siva seeks a new head for his wife's murdered son. All he can find is an elephant, so he takes its head and installs
it upon the son's body, so reviving him. The wife and son forgive the
father, and all is well again. Pillaiyar is made chief of Siva's armies, but
he remains celibate throughout his life. One of his tusks is broken off.
Some interpreters say this broken tusk represents the sacrifice Pillaiyar
made to his father.
Was the old man in the village who worshipped the sin-removing
Pillaiyar hoping both for forgiveness and for some kind of restoration of
the son whose marriage he obstructed and whose death he caused? I can
say only that the story of Vinai Tirkkum Vinayakar together with the story

162

/

Desire In Kinship

of his son's death and his wife's deafness were the three he chose to
convey to me, in a single narrative, as the key events in his life.
Another man told me the story of his own near-death experience with
the god Ayyappan. His father had been forced to sell his land during a
famine and had meagerly supported the family laboring for the same
landlord to whom he had sold out. This father, who the son said had been
more loving towards his sons than their own mother was, had died suddenly of snakebite. The eldest son, the narrator of the story, was left with
several very small younger brothers to take care of. He felt that he could
not afford to marry and have children of his own until he had raised all of
these brothers.
After some time, he became ill with a stomach disease. Over the
months it became worse. After unsuccessful attempts at treatment by
village herbalists and local doctors, his caste elders ordered him to go to
the government hospital in Madurai for treatment. He put his faith in one
of his younger brothers, who had studied through the fifth standard, "to
do the correct things" at the hospital. This younger brother had him
admitted, and the doctors there ordered that he be operated on immediately. He was certain that he was going to die and worried what would
happen to his body. But he told his younger brothers not to take his corpse
back to the village but to have it buried somewhere near the hospital, for
too much money had already been spent on him, he felt. "Then," he said,
"not wanting to go out for nothing, I called upon Ayyappan, to put my
sins upon him." To his great surprise, however, he woke up and recovered from the operation. He credited Ayyappan with saving his life.
As this man told his story, all the events of his life seemed to center
around threats to the continuity of the patriline: the forced sale of the
family lands, the sudden, devastating loss of his father, his anxiety lest he
be unable to marry and have sons of his own, his concern for and dependence on his younger brothers, his belief that his body would not be returned to the ancestral land, and finally, his sense that the burden of
single-handedly taking on the responsibility of the family before he himself was fully grown was more than he could bear. I feel, though I cannot
prove, that his turning to Ayyappan in the hour of his expected death,
asking Ayyappan to shoulder his burden, symbolized his hope that the
patriline not be dropped.
People in Tamil Nadu take gods very personally. That is why they
worship them. In the cases described above, the feelings of fathers about
sons are opened up to us. Sons can free the souls of their fathers, by
forgiving them, or by taking away the burden of their sins (here is another
example of karma being passed on from ancestors to descendants). But

Desire In Kinship

/

163

the son has to exist, to have been bom and not to have died, in order to
take on the burden. Moreover, it is a matter of the son's own choice,
whether to accept the burden or not.
Men have good reason to be anxious, first, lest they have no sons, and
second, lest their sons abandon them, unshoulder the burden of their land,
their lineage, their sins. The land, at least, is likely to be broken up, the
integrity of it lost, if a man has more than one son. Hence the continuity
of the father is in double jeopardy. For fathers always want their sons to
remain together, to keep the land undivided, but sons, more often than
not, end up dividing it. Quarrels between sons are harmful to the family
spirit. This fact was very graphically illustrated in the village one day
when Naccan, a young Ampalakkarar priest, angrily shattered the clay
image of his family deity, because after the death of his father he had not
received as large a share of land as he had expected. Right after this, he
separated from his brothers, establishing a separate household. In shattering the deity he shattered the memory of his father, completing, in this
act, the destruction of the patrimony.
A Woman Sees Herself as a Continuation of Her Mother
(The daughter longs for continuity, but the mother longs for
independence.)
Parallel to the father-son bond is the mother-daughter bond. This
bond, too, is felt to be both vital and vulnerable to breakage, but whereas
in the relation between father and son it is the father who most fears loss
of continuity, in the relation between mother and daughter it is the daughter who fears this loss.
In Tamil poetic discourse, both oral and literary, a common image for
a young woman is the vine (kodi). It is said that her body is as slender and
graceful as a flowered vine. But the vine also is an image of continuity
between generations, especially generations of women, recalling as it
does the umbilical cord, and the processes of flowering and fruiting,
important metaphors in Tamil culture for female sexual maturation
(which is called "blossoming," piittal) and birth-giving. So a female agricultural laborer sings in a lament to her lost mother, "We blossomed on
your vine," and the phrase, "O mother who bore me" is a constant refrain
in these laments, which were the most commonly sung songs among
lower caste women in the two widely separated villages where I heard
and recorded folksongs. 59
Marriage, when the daughter leaves the household of her mother, is a
cutting of the vine. Hence the famous opening words of the song of
Nallatankal, "Enraikki kalyanam ehkal ilankodikki [When will be the

164

/

Desire In Kinship

Plate 20. A boy ploughing.
wedding of our tender vine?]"—recited to me by Anni—are powerfully
ominous. Her wedding coincides with the death of her parents. When she
is told she must leave for her husband's house, she angrily tears off her
ornaments. Consequent upon her wedding, she starves with her children
and is refused reentry into her mother's home. When her oldest son tries
to prevent her from killing herself and her children, she answers him,
"They will laugh at us motherless children."60 To have one's ornaments
torn away, to be cut off from sources of nurturance, to be excluded from
one's home, all of this is the meaning of a girl's being cut off from her

Desire In Kinship

Plate 21.

/

165

Women transplanting rice seedlings.

mother. In some versions of the Nallatankâl story, she is literally dismembered. To be cut off from the mother is equivalent to being oneself cut to
pieces. Many women in Tamil Nadu identify with Nallatankâl. All know
her story.
A girl finds her place of origin in the loins of her mother, which may
be described as a garden, and she identifies her own womb and genitals
with this place. So in one lament, the singer complains to her brother,
"Have you forgotten my pomegranate garden, the place of your birth?"
The two great landmarks in the sexual growth of a girl, her first menstruation and her first parturition (and often subsequent parturitions also) take
place in the house of the mother (tây vîdu). It is important to note that a
girl's natal home is always called her "mother's home," even though in
actual fact the house usually belongs to the father. Similarly, the place of
origin of both males and females is the yôni of the mother (this contrasts
with the Greek formulaic metaphor of a person "springing from [a man's
or god's] loins"). For Tamils, the belly of the mother (tayinudaiya vayiru)
is the place from which one came, and the place to which one goes for
comfort is her lap (madi, "fold"). A grown woman with children of her
own may lie with her head in her mother's lap with no sense of shame.
Adults do not lie with their heads in their fathers' laps in this way.
A child can become separated from the mother through the death of the
mother, or, if the child is a girl, through the child's marriage. In some
laments, the death of the mother and the marriage of the daughter are

Plate 22. Padmini and Anuradha decorate the altar of the goddess Lakshmi for
the Varalakshmi ceremony.
treated as equivalent severances. Then "seeking mother" (ammàvai tèdi)
becomes a natural activity, no matter what degree of maturity the child
has supposedly reached, no matter how distant the world where the
mother dwells. In laments, the dead mother is "hiding" or "gone to a
foreign land," and the daughters are left seeking (compare this to the
Greek myth of Demeter, where the mother seeks the daughter).
The term ammàvai tedi is a formula, a cliché, in Tamil Nadu. In the
mid-seventies a magazine story with that title appeared. There it was
written that all human souls on departure from their bodies seek their
mother, and all good souls find her, appearing to them in whatever form
she took on earth. The boy-god Murugan is a helper in this stoiy, settling
in the lap of his own mother, the great goddess, and appealing to her on
behalf of all the mother-seeking souls. Males as well as females seek the
mother after death.
In life it is the girl who is most likely to be separated from her mother,
especially while still a child, because marriage is normally virilocal, and
girls are younger than boys when they marry. Not only when she is still
a child, but when she is a mother, or even a grandmother herself, a
woman may still make visits to her natal home, "seeking her mother."
Thus it happened that one young woman, married to her mother's brother, came to the town of her birth to visit her mother, only to find that

Desire In Kinship

/

167

their paths had crossed on the way. The mother had gone to the daughter's
house to see her mother (the daughter's mother-in-law). The young
woman said with a smile, "I came seeking my mother and she's gone
seeking her mother." This young woman was more fortunate than many,
in that her mother-in-law was her own mother's mother. This family,
though it was patrilineal, also sheltered a strong and active matriline; all
the daughters continued throughout their lives to seek the advice and
comfort of their mothers in times of crisis.
Patrilocal marriage contributes to the continuity of the patriline, but it
causes a break in the continuity of the matriline, and this break is felt
especially keenly by the daughter who is cut off (albeit only partially and
temporarily) not only from the mother but from the entire natal home and
family. The mother stays in the place she was, and she may have other
children to console her, but the daughter has no other mothers. So a
daughter may feel herself to be shattered by her marriage. Conversely, a
return to the mother's home may be felt by the daughter as a reuniting of
herself, with herself. Surely, the break in continuity with the mother is
one meaning of the several major myths about females shattered or dismembered as a consequence of marriage of the allied action of males
(Mariamman beheaded, Kannaki and Minakshi debreasted, Nallatahkal
and Sinkammal cut up into parts). In the village near Madurai where I
worked, the clay image of the goddess Mantaiyammal is broken to pieces
on her festival day, which is also her wedding day. A similar idea may lie
behind the representation of many village goddesses, for example, the
"seven sisters," as physically plural, though one in spirit, and sometimes
also in name. Kanniyammal in Themozhiyar's village is such a goddess.
In her shrine are seven small identical stones, which are her. On the other
hand, her festival day celebrates not her wedding but her return to the
house of her mother. And her myth tells not of her shattering, but of the
merger of the sisters into one figure who is their own mother. The mother
saves the world by destroying a demon who wants to marry her. And the
sisters defeat their husbands by proving, in this united action, that the
female force in the universe is superior to the male. Thus in this myth,
continuity among females triumphs over the hetero-erotic forces threatening it. Usually, though, it is the other way round.
I have suggested here that daughters are more anxious about the break
in mother-daughter continuity than are mothers. This is because the
daughter has more to lose. Whereas a father seeks his own continuance
through his sons, a mother does not, I would argue, seek such continuance through her daughters, at least not to such an extent. The reasons are
several. In the first place, a mother does not ordinarily pass land on to her
daughters. The garden of the yoni is entirely metaphorical. In the second

168

Plate 23.

/

Desire In Kinship

The village priest anoints the lion of the goddess Kanniyamma.

place, though a woman may achieve spiritual immortality, she is not
dependent upon the existence of daughters, or any offspring of her own,
in order to reach this state. Patrilineal households may have female house
deities. These are, minimally, those who have died unwidowed, "still
with flowers" (puvodakkari); even if they die unmarried, they will be
honored among this collectivity of saints. When they die, they become
again like children, I was told. Children's garments are offered to them to
wear, for they are again as free and as pure as children. Living women in
laments express envy for the dead mother's freedom—but one does not
have to have been a mother in order to become free. Women who have
died in childbirth, women who have died heroically, satis, all of these
may be specially honored and deified. The great South Indian goddess
Kannaki was a woman who died childless, in agony after her husband's
murder. Similarly the Madurai woman Sinkammal, murdered by her
brothers, and likewise the Coimbatore woman Tankal, who dies in suicide with her brothers, both become goddesses after their death and live
forever in heaven as well as in the hearts of their many worshippers.

Desire In Kinship

/

169

Daughters are not needed for the immortality conferred by martyrdom.
Men desire offspring for the purpose of future continuance. Women
desire offspring more for the rewards of the present. If a couple has no
offspring, or only female offspring, the woman will be blamed by her
neighbors. If a couple has many children, especially many sons, the
status of the woman will be enhanced. Sons will be expected to support
both parents in their old age. If a couple have only daughters, they are
more likely to spend their old age alone.
Large numbers of children bring status and increase che chances of
future well-being, but the bearing and raising of them is a hardship for
women. Thus women are much more likely to want to limit the size of
their families than are men. Voluntary tubal ligations are much more
common in Tamil Nadu than voluntary vasectomies. Women may fight
with their husbands over their right to be sterilized. But a woman will
rarely allow herself to be sterilized unless she has had at least one son.
And if a woman must choose which child to feed, she will feed her son
and let her daughter go hungry; hence, even in Tamil Nadu, more boys
live to adulthood than girls.61
We may tentatively conclude that mothers do not value daughters as
highly as daughters value mothers, or as highly as fathers and mothers
value sons. However daughters value mothers very highly. Hence, while
men (and some women) worship young, childless male deities and seek
refuge in them, women (and some men) are more likely to worship the
goddess as mother and seek refuge in her in that form. More than anything else, the mother is a protector. So the refrain of a popular song to
Mariamman pleads, "Except for you, there exists no one to protect me,
Mari-mother [unnai vida yarum illai ennai kakka Mariattai]." Women
gather and sing this song.62
It is clear that Tamils perceive each of these two vertical bonds,
mother-daughter and father-son, as problematic. On one end of each
bond, there is an intense desire for continuity. The other end of each is
lukewarm, and there are strong forces threatening continuity on both
sides. The maintenance of either bond is possible within a South Indian
family; to keep it strong is something one might realistically long for; one
will have observed that it remains strong in some other families. But
unbroken continuity of both lines simultaneously, a matriline and a
patriline within the same household, cannot be easily maintained. In the
most prevalent form of marriage, marriage of a man with his mother's
brother's daughter, maintenance of continuity within both lines is essentially impossible.

170

/

Desire In Kinship

The mother-daughter bond and the father-son bond may be imagined
as two parallel threads, woven across by two other threads perpendicular
to the first two but parallel to each other: the brother-sister bond and the
husband-wife bond. These two bonds also pull against each other. Here
we will consider first the nature of the brother-sister bond.
The Bond Between Brother and Sister is Strong
but Must Be Denied
Childhood erotic adventures between siblings probably occur among people everywhere. The feelings associated with these adventures get variously transformed, rechanneled, or repressed by different cultures in different ways. For instance, in the United States and Europe, the so-called
latency period, during which girls hate boys and boys hate girls, discourages contact between opposite sex children, though secret erotic exploration during this period also is not entirely eliminated. Separation of siblings from each other and exposure to many unrelated children in school
contexts is another of many Western customs which discourage sexual
contact among siblings, without incest taboos ever having to be explicitly
taught. In other societies, children may be taught about incest prohibitions and shamed out of incestuous contacts at an early age, and/or girls
may be married in early puberty and physically separated from their
brothers, so that sibling puppy love never has a chance to blossom into
full-fledged adult eroticism. Whatever the shape of its repression, however, the fact is that for many human beings, thefirsterotic partnership is
formed with a sibling.
This is not to say that the first erotic feelings are directed toward a
sibling. In all cases where the mother is the primary caretaker, the mother
can only be the first object of a child's desire, and even among scholars
who reject much of Freudian theory, there remains little doubt that infant
sexuality is a reality. One has only to watch any baby nursing to be aware
of the intensity of feeling involved in this act. Erotic feelings on the part
of mothers while nursing are described with horrified fascination in Indian folktales while they are discussed as "natural" in American parenting
magazines.63 Evidence continues to mount that repressed erotic love for
the mother occurs in many places throughout the world, including in
particular South Asia, even if such repressed love is not "universal" in
some absolute sense.64
In searching for psychoanalytic understandings of South Asian familial eroticism, I have found Karen Horney's reformulation of Freud to be

Desire In Kinship

/

171

more useful than Freud himself.65 Homey agrees with Freud's idea that
the mother is the first object of erotic desire for both male and female
children; she departs from Freud by suggesting that it is not necessary for
a female to repudiate her identification with the mother and her desire for
her in order to attain normal psychosexual development. Horney goes on
to suggest that womb envy on the part of men may be the source of the
myth that females are castrated and envy the physical penis. Lacan's
reworking of Freud will also be useful to us here, especially his emphasis
upon the feelings of longing and incompleteness of the subject/self that
ensue upon the wedding of the subject to the System.
In India, erotic feelings for the mother on the part of both males and
females are perhaps stronger than they are elsewhere. The reasons why
this might be so are a matter of debate,66 but the manifestations of these
feelings in Indian superstructure and behavior are too massive to ignore.67
In Tamil culture, love for the mother is strongly encouraged. Erotic
love for the mother is, of course, strongly repressed. However, an interesting bit of Tamil ideology (perhaps borrowed from the Victorian British?) claims that children before puberty have no sexual feelings. Hence
close physical relations with the mother are allowed up until that time.
Many adults, especially men, remember having been nursed for years,
even to the age of five or beyond.
What does all this mean for sibling relations? If desire to possess the
mother is especially strong in India, we might expect sibling rivalry to be
especially intense. But there is no evidence that this is the case. Indian
children are often reported by Western observers to be more cooperative
among themselves than their Western counterparts.68 Part of the reason
may be that children's rivalry for the mother abates when they discover
each other as potential, secret sexual partners.
In the case of older brother and younger sister, such a discovery and
transferrence would be especially likely to occur. For the boy, a younger
sister, being female offspring to his mother, could be seen as a duplicate
of the mother, only, being smaller, she would be less threatening, more
accessible, and more amenable to control by him. For the girl, an elder
brother, being a protector, could also be seen as a form of the mother,
only, being male and other, he would possess added fascination.
In support of these latter transferences, Tamil mythology creates a
stunning isomorphism between the brother-sister relation, the sisterbrother relation, the mother-child relation, and the husband-wife relation. There are many local shrines containing one large rock and seven
small rocks. In different shrines these are interpreted variously as (1) a

172

/

Desire In Kinship

mother (Nallatankal) and her children, (2) a brother and his younger
sisters (Pattiniyamman), (3) a sister and her older brothers (Sinkammal in
Melur near Madurai; the siblings in the Auvaiyar story told below), (4) a
husband and his wives, and (5) a wife (Tiropati) and her husbands.69
I am suggesting here that intense erotic love for the mother might
under some circumstances be converted to intense attachment between
brother and sister. A belief in the reality of the blood bond, in the powerful emotional significance of having emerged from the same womb
(.cahotarar) would contribute to this attachment. Never being fulfilled, the
brother and sister's desire for each other will never be spent. It will
remain chaste and eternal, but pervaded by pain. Each will feel
sacrificed—the one a martyred protector, the other a martyred innocent.
In quest of a cultural ideal, through a vision of wholeness embodied in the
kinship code, each will seek to recover the other. But only in death, out
of time and beyond the code, will they find this recovery possible.
The bond of deep longing joining brother and sister, and the idealization of this bond, are attested in many places throughout Tamil Nadu. In
the next chapter, an example from life of this bond of longing will be
narrated. Similar examples of a culturally sanctioned powerful emotional
tie between brother and sister are reported from North India70 and
Nepal.71 Certainly it is not a uniquely Tamil invention. The historical
taproot of this feeling (for it is deeply rooted) might even be traced to
Proto-Indo-European kinship and poetics.72 But in Tamil Nadu, where
dramatic intensity of feeling vivifies all art as well as many household
dramas, the tragedy of the brother-sister bond receives a wide range of
remarkable expressions.
In a recent essay, Indira Peterson has brought together and analyzed a
number of accounts of the diverse formal enactments and representations
of brother-sister love in South Asia.73 Peterson's material includes
myths, folktales, proverbs, rites, movies, and novels. This material is
drawn from throughout South Asia, but Peterson focuses on Tamil Nadu.
A theme Peterson finds running throughout both North and South Indian
material is the sister's possession of "magical" or "sacred" protective
power over her brother. This balances the protective power that the
brother exercises over his sister in the social realm, so that the relationship
between brother and sister is overall one of reciprocity. In several myths,
the sister's protective power takes the form of clairvoyance: she is able to
perceive hidden dangers threatening her brother and so protect him from
them. The power of the sister is hidden or covert in a second sense as
well, Peterson finds, in that it often gets downplayed, or interpreted out
of existence, in villager's exegeses of the stories in which this power is

Desire In Kinship

I

173

revealed. This hiding of sisterly power is especially apparent in the North
Indian village of Karimpur, where Susan Wadley studied women's songs
and rituals.74 There, a rite in which the sister ties a protective band around
her brother's wrist is interpreted by villagers as the sister acting in her
own behalf, seeking to obtain her brother's protection of her, rather than
acting altruistically to protect him. A katha told in conjunction with this
rite is similarly reinterpreted by the villagers. In this story, "at the time of
her brother's wedding a sister saves her brother from eating poisoned
food, protects him from magical thorns—despite the ridicule of the wedding guests—and ultimately stands guard over her brother and his wife on
their wedding night, managing to kill a snake which creeps in to bite the
brother."75 Karimpur villagers telling this story interpret it as a model of
the sister "worshipping" the brother and exhort all other sisters to follow
her example. For North India, Peterson concludes, "the notion of women
as powerful beings is underplayed or suppressed in the ritual as well as in
the social realm, perhaps because it is seen as potentially disruptive to the
stability of actual social relations between brothers and sisters, not to
mention between men and women in general."76
By contrast, in South India, the sacred power of sisters over brothers,
and indeed of women in general, is more overtly recognized.77 The institution of cross-cousin marriage has much to do with this recognition, for
in South India, as we shall see presently, the marital tie is clearly represented in important ancient and modem stories as a continuation of the
sibling tie. Further, in such stories, the woman is portrayed as the center
of the family, the main unifying force within it, the point of conjunction
between otherwise disjoined human beings.78 Thus Beck argues that the
"kin nucleus" as it appears in South Indian mythology is not a married
couple nor a male head-of-household but is a female with her father,
brother, husband, and sons.79 The nucleus of this nucleus appears in the
great temple of Mmakshi in Madurai, in which MInakshi, owner of the
temple, stands at the center flanked by her husband Siva and her brother
Vishnu. Minakshi remains eternally at a point of conjunction, precisely
between the two males, because in her story, her wedding is celebrated
but kept short of completion every year.80
As Peterson observes, the brother-sister bond is "the central focus of
the south Indian kinship system and marriage and no doubt influences the
sister's self-image and the brother's image of the sister at all levels of the
psyche."81
Peterson discusses three major Tamil myths, a novel, and a movie
whose central topic is the brother-sister bond. The first of these is the
Auvaiyar Katai, a story told in conjunction with a ritual of protection

174

/

Desire In Kinship

performed by women for their brothers. This ritual, the Auvaiyar nonpu,
is supposed to be performed in secret, with no men present (although men
can know about it), and men are not supposed to hear the story. Peterson,
following Reynolds,82 reports that only low-caste women perform this
nonpu, but I have found that high-caste women also relish telling the
Auvaiyar story, and also like to keep it secret from men.
Auvaiyar was an unmarried woman poet of the Sangam era, celebrated
for her didactic verse. In the story, Auvaiyar teaches a younger woman to
bring posterity to her seven brothers "by ritually eating substances and
objects symbolic of death and evil omen. She helps the brothers get
married and herself marries a king. When the brothers are once again
struck by poverty because of their wives' negligent behavior, the sister
intervenes, teaches the nonpu to her sisters-in-law, and restores them to
their prosperous condition."83 Here the priority of the brother-sister bond
over the husband-wife bond is clear. Also evident is a tension between
nattanar and nattanar, sisters-in-law, sister and wife of the same man.
This tension is the focus of the story of Nallatahkal, "Good Little
Sister," and here even more clearly the sister's bond with her brother has
both moral and spiritual priority over the bond with the wife. In this story,
Nallatahkal and her brother Nallatampi ("Good Little Brother") are raised
together and love each other so dearly that they are inseparable. When she
comes of age, Nallatahkal is given in marriage against her will to the king
of Kasi, to whom she bears seven children.
When a great famine afflicts Kasi, Nallatahkal decides to
seek her brother's aid; busy with a royal campaign, Nallatampi sends his sister home to his wife Muliyalankari ("Inauspicious Witch"). Muli insults Nallatahkal, starves her
children, and throws the woman out with her children.
With the help of shepherds, the distraught Nallatahkal finds
an abandoned well; she throws all her children into the
well, and herself commits suicide by jumping in after
them. When Nallatampi comes looking for his lost sister,
he finds the well by means of the tali (wedding necklace)
and pattai (an ornament given to women by their brothers)
which she has left outside the well, and which, having been
turned into a rock at Nallatankal's command, are visible
only to him and the woman's husband. The brother cremates the dead bodies and promises to avenge his sister.
Going home he arranges for the wedding of his son. At the
wedding he denounces Muli as a murderess to his own son,
and engineers a horrible death for Muli and her relatives.
When Nallatankal's husband arrives, Nallatampi informs

Desire In Kinship

/

175

him of all the events, and the two brothers-in-law commit
suicide. Siva and Parvati revive the brother, sister, husband and the seven children. Nallatankäl demands and receives the boon of being enshrined in a temple and tank in
Käsi, while her sister-in-law is turned into a stone, to become the laughing-stock of travellers. The two brothers-inlaw, rejoicing, ascend to Siva's heaven, Kailasa.84
A third major myth in which the sister-brother bond is the central
theme is the long Tamil epic, Annanmär Katai, recorded and analyzed by
Brenda Beck.85 The name of this epic, The Story of the Older Brothers,
perhaps reflects a recent (North Indian influenced?) attempt to mask the
importance of women in Tamil culture, just as the other major Tamil epic,
Cilappatikäram, whose most powerful figures are all women, is nowadays named Kövalan Katai (The Story of Kövalari), after the heroine's
rather weak-willed and ineffectual husband.
Beck gives to Annanmär Katai the English title, The Three Twins,
because the epic is not only about brothers, but about two brothers and a
sister, born together as magical triplets, who accompany each other
through many adventures. The sister, Tankäl, has a clairvoyant connection with her brothers, Ponnar and Cankar, so that when they die, she
learns of their death in a dream, finds their bodies in the forest, temporarily revives them, and then dies and rises to heaven with them. Tankäl
never marries; Ponnar and Cankar do (Tankäl helpfully cremates their
wives when she learns of her brothers' death). Beck shows that the epic
in its entirety shows a repetition of certain relations over the generations;
in each generation a powerful female aids the heroes; with each succeeding generation this female becomes smaller and more specific: Great Goddess Parvati, regional goddess Cellattä, local goddess Käli, mother of the
heroes Tämarai, sister of the heroes Tankäl. Each of these magical females, Beck says, blends into the others above or below her. Perhaps,
therefore, we may speak of a kind of mythic matriline as forming the
backbone of this epic. However the main point to be stressed here is that
Annanmär Katai represents yet another piece of Tamil literature of widespread and enduring power whose main import is the celebration of the
brother-sister tie.
When we come down to modern times and modem art forms, we find
the same themes expressed, if anything, even more clearly than before.
Here the best I can do is quote Peterson's beautiful translation of a passage from a Tamil novel of 1968, Nila Padmanabhan's Talaimuraikal
(Generations). I reproduce this passage here just because it gives us a
very precise "native exegesis" of the biological-cum-emotional heart of

176

/

Desire In Kinship

Tamil kinship. In this passage a brother faces his sister for the first time
after determining to rescue her from a life of lonely widowhood imprisoned within her father's house:
. . . perhaps these two hearts met and communed with
each other in that immortal moment when face met face,
and eyes embraced eyes.
In those silent moments, no words passed between them.
They felt a kind of joy sweep over them, as if, simply
through the exchange of glances, each heart had shared
with the other all its sorrows, troubles, and hopes for release. It seemed as though the most ingenious edifices of
language and phrase, the most intricate dexterities of conversation, handed down through generations, through
eons—it seemed as though in the eternalflow[piraväkam]
of that soundless [anasvara] moment, all these were
blunted, rendered useless, smashed to pieces, when
they confronted the steady torrent of that wordless
moment. . . .
How wonderful!
Tiravi was overcome with wonder at the powerful experience of deep feeling, an experience that he could not quite
take in. "Is it possible that, just because the seeds of our
life, our bodily substance, our very blood, and our birth
itself, came out of a single source, we are blessed with the
transcendent vision of uniting with the other in feeling, of
intuiting the very thoughts of the other?"
Each "intuiting the very thoughts of the other," the brother and sister
find that their oneness of body (udampu) is transformed into a oneness of
spirit (uyir); as in Annanmär Katai, those born together willfully die,
shed their bodies, and mount to heaven as spirits together. For all the
words that are given to its expression, this oneness of brother and sister
is "soundless," it "smashes words." The oneness itself "handed down
through the generations" makes all the weight, the tradition of these generations, invalid. The longing of brother and sister to reunite with each
other can only happen when they step out of the terminology, the eternal
tradition, the symbolic world created by their ancestors, which holds
them apart even as it is built on the love which binds them. Peterson
comments,
In the affective vision of the brother-sister relationship in
the south as well as in the north it is the enduring love
between two human beings born out of the same source and

Desire In Kinship

/

177

the same soil that is ultimately stressed, the Tamil case
being different chiefly in this respect, that here there is a
tremendous consciousness of the sister as a sacred being,
and of the brother and sister as the primordial, nuclear
pair.86
Peterson does not mention at this point the other great difference between
South and North India which affects the brother-sister bond, namely, that
in the south, brother and sister may marry their children to each other. But
she concludes her paper with a cinema song from the 1960s, which shows
more clearly than any other piece of "data" one might produce, how in the
Tamil ideal, siblings live in their children, and in uniting their children,
unite their own lives again.
The film, Pacamalar (Flower of Affection) is about a brother and sister
separated against their wills. The song is a lullaby, sung simultaneously
by the brother to his baby son and by the sister to her baby daughter. They
sing about marrying the babies to each other. Two important technical
details should be mentioned here: first, the song encourages a reversal of
the norms of kanyadana and dowry-marriage, by suggesting that the boy
will offer wealth in exchange for the girl's hand in marriage. Second, the
kind of marriage the protagonists here sing about is "within the rules" (the
babies are cross-cousins), but it is not the "normative" kind of crosscousin marriage. Most commonly, mother's brother's daughter marriage
is "preferred." MBD is the kind of marriage which, when it becomes
patterned and institutionalized, fosters nonreciprocal relations among
lines of kindred and "integrates" larger numbers of people. This is also
the kind of marriage which is in line with the principle of kanyadana. But
the other kind of cross-cousin marriage, the kind sung about here, may be
in some ways more satisfying, in that it approximates more closely the
ideal set up by the terminology, it allows for true reciprocity between
siblings over the generations, and it transforms the sibling bond into the
spousal bond without crossing sexes: the sister returns through her daughter, the brother through his son. Perhaps for this very reason, patrilateral
marriage is discouraged.
The song is called "Malarntum malarata malar" (Flower Both Blossomed and Unblossomed or Half-blossomed Flower). The title I think
refers both to the nature of the baby and to the nature of brother-sister
love. Peterson translates the song thus:
O child slumbering like a half-blown flower,
O wild goose who blossoms
like the dawn turning into day!

178

/

Desire In Kinship

Soft breeze rippling through the river,
caressing the vine!
0 Tamil poetry, born on Potikai hill,
reared in Maturai city!
Brother.

You were born to win many battles
with your elephants and armies
you were born to marry your aunt's [attai] daughter
and live in joyful love!
Sister:
He'll give you a gold watch and diamond necklace,
he'll ask for your hand—
your uncle [maman] will give much wealth,
he'll offer the whole world,
in exchange for the sister's [tahkai] daughter's hand
in marriage for his son!
Sister:
Shall I tell you of how my brother brought me up
like a darling daughter,
sheltered me under his wing?
Shall I tell you of the unimaginable misfortune
which separated us?
Together: We were born together, joined like the eye and
the pupil,
like the pupil and the image within!
Though the earth and sea and sky should come to
an end,
we shall not forget our love,
nothing can break our bond!
In later chapters we shall see how such thoughts enter into the lives of
ordinary people.
The Bond Between Husband and Wife is Conflictful
but Difficult to Sever
Whatever the sources of its strength, the sibling bond is primordial. It
comes before any bond with an outsider. In some matrilineal societies,
including some South Indian ones, the brother-sister bond retains priority
throughout life. A man's home is his mother's and sister's home. Brothers and sisters cooperate. Husbands come and go. Hence in a traditional
Nayar household a woman had many quasi-husbands and one "real" husband whom she met only once in her life. All of the husbands were
peripheral figures. Only her relations with her brothers were of genuine
significance.

Desire In Kinship

/

179

In many patrilineal societies, on the other hand, even though the
brother-sister bond has temporal and emotional priority, it is expected to
give way to the husband-wife bond. To the suppression of erotic ties (if
they exist) is added the severance of economic ones. A woman after
marriage leaves the household of her mother and her brother and joins the
household of her husband. If she is dependent upon the labor or landholdings of a man to support her, her husband or his kin must provide it.
Hence in parts of North India, a woman after marriage is considered to be
literally no longer of the same blood as her natal kin. In central Uttar
Pradesh a rule of village exogamy combined with a rule prohibiting marriage with any close kinsman make for a relatively clean break between
a girl and her natal family at marriage and help ensure that her loyalties
and dependencies after marriage will be on her husband's side. This is not
to say that in North India a married woman does not desire to return to her
natal home, or does not have chances, even frequent chances, to do so.
But marital conventions are so arranged that a woman's natal ties are
clearly secondary to her marital ones, and a woman's husband is clearly
dominant over her.
In most of Tamil Nadu, however, the brother-sister tie is neither
clearly severed at marriage, nor is its emotional priority over other ties
translated into social priority. The blood bond remains, and is affectively
the strongest bond, but the marital bond is supposed to take precedence
over it in cases where the two bonds conflict.
Meanwhile, the nature of the bond between spouses is vague, neither
clearly hierarchical nor clearly egalitarian. On the one hand, the ideal of
chastity and devotion to the spouse is entirely a female ideal, entailing a
wife's subordination to her husband. On the other hand, it is not unusual
to find men espousing a "feminist" point of view on this matter. So for
example, one old man, advising a young man on his imminent marriage,
told him, "Think that a goddess is entering your home." On the level of
ideology, either the male or the female may be regarded as superior,
depending upon who is talking, and under what circumstances. In practice, an egalitarian household policy appears to be common. When I
asked villagers who made the important decisions in their households,
more than half of both males and females said that husband and wife made
them together.
In part because (and to the extent that) many of them are wage earners,
wives in Tamil Nadu often will not accept a subordinate role with respect
to their husbands. As wage earners, women laborers with whom I spoke
regarded it as unfair that they received smaller daily wages than their

180

/

Desire In Kinship

husbands. They were quite vehement on this issue. They considered the
work they did to be equal in value to the work of men.
Within the household, as well as in the domain of paid labor, there was
a strong spirit of rivalry between many women and their husbands. Wives
would not automatically accept submission. Neither would their husbands. Neither was it easy for wives and husbands to keep out of each
other's way, sharing a household as they did. Consequently their relationship was often, from what I was able to observe, disputatious. Nevertheless, at all levels of society, lifelong monogamy and fidelity to the spouse
were the ideal, though some honored this rule in the breach more than did
others. Even among members of untouchable castes, who are often reported to be more lax than higher castes as regards marriage rules, divorce
was not easy. When I asked one young Paraiyar woman whose husband
had deserted her and her children why she did not divorce him and remarry, she replied, "It would bring down the caste." Others of her community concurred.
Neither could a man easily break the tie with his wife. In a single
village, I heard of three cases of men murdering their wives, and one case
of a man committing suicide, because their wives stood in the way of their
marrying another woman. Murder and suicide are desperate ways out of
a situation from which there is no other escape. While the prevalence of
such violence does not support the idea that women in South India have
relatively high status, the fact of wife-murder does suggest that the marital bond is taken seriously: only death can sever it.
In the ideal, both the husband and the wife should remain faithful to
each other, regardless of the hardships involved. According to one Paraiyar elder, if a couple come into conflict with each other, the other
members of their kindred group should help them work things out. Only
if a wife is totally insane and uncontrollable should she be sent back to her
parents' home, and then only as a last resort. Even if she lives "like an
animal in the forest," he said, her husband should put up with her.
Women, in the same way, told me that if their husbands were unreasonable, they had to simply not think about it, "not make a big thing out of
it [pericakkakkudatu]," as they said. The adage, "Oruttarporutta, iruvar
varka [If one can bear it, both can live]," has high salience for such
people.
The eternal conflict between spouses is abundantly reflected in Indian
mythology, especially Tamil, which debates the issue of male versus
female superiority back and forth endlessly on a cosmic level, in the form
of battles and contests between deities or demons and their real or wouldbe mates. Siva and his consort(s) are especially given to such confronta-

Desire In Kinship

/

181

tions, but other deities also get into the act often enough (e.g., Rama and
Tadaka, Aijuna and Alii, Kanniyamma and the buffalo demon). The
rivalrous relationship between spouses contrasts with the cooperative
relationship between brother and sister, so that battles for supremacy
between brother and sister occur rarely if ever in Tamil myths.
The Spouse Usurps the Place of the Sibling
Both in mythology and in real life, it is painful for a sister to watch
another woman become mistress of her mother's house and of her
brother, more painful still if it appears that the beloved brother is deceived, and the home closed off, by the newcomer. So Nallatanka} complains to her older brother, "My mother would herself have invited me
into her house, but I don't know whether your wife will do the same."87
Similarly, a Paraiyar woman sings in a personal lament to her brother, "I
go back to the house where I was raised, and find that your wife has set
two mongrel dogs to guard it."
By the same token, it is painful for a brother to watch his sister become
the possession of another man, more painful still if the man appears to
abuse her. There have been at least two very popular Tamil movies on this
theme: Pacamalar, mentioned earlier, and Tahkaikkor Kitam. In
Tahkaikkor Kitam (A Song for My Sister), released in 1980, a boy struggles as a day-laborer to raise his younger sister, put her through college,
and marry her wealthily. In dreams and in waking, he is obsessed by
her image. But because of a misunderstanding, after her marriage, she
disowns him. Meanwhile, a villain plots to rape the hero's sister's husband's younger sister and put the blame on the hero. The hero saves his
sister-in-law by shooting the villain, while the dying villain blows the
hero to smithereens with a hand grenade. The closing credits are highlighted by shots of a young boy playing with an even younger girl in an
idyllic green pasture.
This movie played for months to theaters packed with sobbing crowds.
The theme of the older brother martyred for the sake of his younger sister
seemed to strike a nerve in many people. The theme of the cast-off older
brother occurs in different form in the myth of Madurai MInakshi's wedding. MInakshi's older brother Arakar (a form of Vishnu) travels to her
wedding with Cuntar (a form of Siva) but returns in anger when he is told
that the wedding has been started without him. (Coincidentally, the
names of MInakshi's husband and brother both have the same meaning,
"Beautiful Man," in Sanskrit and Tamil respectively).
The story of Arakar in turn has local variants, for example, the story
of Ponnar-Cankar as told to me by a Paraiyar shaman north of Madurai.

182

/

Desire In Kinship

According to this shaman, Ponnar-Cankar, the patron and possessing
deity of the shaman, was a deity in chains. "Why was he in chains?" I
asked. "He had to be kept in chains because he was such an angry god,"
the shaman answered. "Why was he angry?" "Because he couldn't go to
his sister's wedding." "Why couldn't he go to his sister's wedding?"
"How could he," concluded the shaman, "when he was in chains?"88
Strange as the circularity of the shaman's story may seem to us, it
reflects with a certain accuracy the bind that ensnares the older brother
who loves his younger sister: eternally bound by his passion for his sister
because he can never spend it, unable to spend it because of the way in
which he is bound to her, he will never be able to break free.
Spouses, meanwhile, are bound in an opposite sense. Though their
relationship may be hostile, because of the ideal of fidelity it is difficult
for them to sever connections with each other. Indeed, the very fact of
their being forcibly bound to each other may induce hostility between
them, as we see in the West also. (Plato's Dialogues have been translated
into Tamil, and several Tamil men told me, with assent in their voices,
that Socrates said of marriage, "It's like a fort. Those who are out want
in. Those who are in want out.")
Ayya referred to marriage as ceyatkai punarcci, "artificial union."
Love that "happens by itself' he called iyatkai punarcci, "natural union."
He even likened wives to porutpendlr, "women who live for money"
(i.e., prostitutes) because they trade their sexual services for material
protection. The massive exchanges of wealth that take place at weddings
contribute to this cynical view of marriage, which view is not a novel one
in Tamil Nadu. Ayya got his analogy between wives and prostitutes not
from Germaine Greer but from the eighth-century Tamil text Tirumantiram. The tenth-century text Tirukkovaiyar, more sympathetic to female
sensibilities, similarly criticizes the way in which, "like pearls and conch
shells, young girls are sent everywhere, anywhere, to be ornaments for
men's bodies."
The elements of force, self-interest, and artificiality characterizing
marriage contrast with the spontaneity and altruism of the brother-sister
bond. Peterson cites proverbs and songs from all over India celebrating
the "purity", "unselfishness," and "joy" of this bond.89 Of folksongs sung
upon a bride's return to her natal home, Peterson notes, "the focus of
these songs is not the obligatory aspect of the [brother-sister] tie, but the
natural, mutual love of the siblings."
In short, one pattern that emerges (with many variants and exceptions)
from an examination of sibling and spouse relations in Tamil culture
seems to be this: that brother and sister develop a strong affectional bond

Desire In Kinship

/

183

Plate 24. Padmini at the doorstep.
for each other but are not allowed to share a life, while spouses are
expected to share a life regardless of the degree of their compatibility.
The spouse may become in some ways like an unwanted sibling, competing for superiority, for goodness in the eyes of the world, for the favors
(such as money) that the world has to offer. And the sibling may become
like a desired but forbidden mate. Emotionally, the sibling and spouse
relationships seem to switch places back and forth. While in social action,
each is kept strictly separate, in the mind, each is easily converted into the
other.
In mythology, this interconvertibility of sibling and spouse relationships is clearly apparent. So, for example, in the epic Cilappatikaram, an

184

/

Desire In Kinship

episode occurs in which the husband and wife Kovalan and Kannaki are
asleep on the road to Madurai. Two ruffians come along and ask their
protector, the Buddhist nun Kavundi, who they are. The nun replies,
"They are my children." At this, one ruffian comments, "Have you ever
noticed how brother and sister often act as though they were husband and
wife?" In the mind of Kavundi, the spouses have been turned into siblings. In the mind of the ruffian, these "siblings" are turned back into
spouses again.
In the Annanmär Katai studied by Beck, the heroine Tankäl and her
brothers Ponnar and Cankar are incarnations of the goddess Parvati and
her brother Vishnu; but they are also incarnations of the Mahabharata
heroine Draupadi and her five husbands the Pandava brothers. I have
already suggested that in the Annanmär Katai, the descent-by-incamation
of Tankäl from a series of goddesses is a kind of mythic matriliny. If this
is so, we may see in the Annanmär Katai a shadow of the generational
alternation of siblings and spouses which Dravidian kinship in its idealized form represents.
A modern singer takes up the theme of sibling-turned-to-spouse when
she laments to her older brother, who has forsaken her (so she feels) for
his wife, "Have you gone with Madhavi, and have you forgotten my
pomegranate garden, the place of your birth?" Madhavi was a courtesan
for whose sake Kövalan deserted Kannaki. The singer is implying that the
wife is like a prostitute, while she herself (the singer, the sister) is the true
and original wife, and the rightful representative of the mother.90
Sister and wife of the same man, then, are coequals. Often in both
myth and life they are bitter rivals and enemies (though sometimes, as we
shall see later, they are just the opposite of this). Brother and husband of
the same woman are in a similar relationship. If, either the brother-sister
bond were less strong to start out with, or the husband-wife bond were
looser or more easily dissoluble, we might not find the sibling and spouse
relationship in mirror opposition, as we do. Whatever its causes, however, this opposition is a powerful presence in many people's lives.
CONCLUSION

" . . . the meeting place that will never reach its end . . . "
Tirukkövaiyär, 307.
Dravidian kinship terminology is a highly patterned, symmetrical, and
indeed aesthetically satisfying verbal system. If the terminology reflected
precisely the organization of human beings on the ground, then all the
tensions described in this chapter would be resolved and all the desires
would be fulfilled. Matrilines would not conflict with patrilines, women

Figure 11.

Ideal pattern of bilateral cross-cousin marriage.

Figure 12. Kolam. A design drawn by women on the threshold of the
house in the morning, when all is well with the family. One of many.

186

/

Desire In Kinship

would not conflict with men, the bond between siblings would not
conflict with the bond between spouses. A single small family, two lines
of women, two lines of men, two pairs of siblings, two pairs of spouses,
would meet all its own needs forever. Patrilines and matrilines would
parallel and reinforce each other. Father-son continuity and motherdaughter continuity would harmonize. These harmonized continuities, in
turn would harmonize the bonds between siblings and spouses. A father
would continue in his son and a mother in her daughter, and then, when
the children of siblings became spouses, the siblings themselves, in the
bodies of their children, would reunite as marriage partners. Spouses
would bear siblings, siblings would bear spouses, and the separate continuities of matrilines and patrilines would merge.
I have tried to show that in Tamil Nadu, there are strong expectations
that each of these different continuities will be maintained; the expectations for harmony are perhaps reinforced by the aesthetic symmetry of the
terminology system.
But in real life, as we know, this terminological system is not acted out
perfectly, indeed it could never be. Rather it occurs in various partial
manifestations, each of which approximately fulfills some people's
dreams, but completely baffles others. The baffled dreams are not thereby
killed; rather their unfulfillment leads to a sense of injustice—A sister
thinks, "My brother should have stayed loyal to me, but instead, by
favoring his wife, he betrayed me." Or a husband thinks, "My wife
should do as I say, but instead she coddles her brother." Or a father
thinks, "My daughter should have married my sister's son, but instead
she eloped with a boy on her mother's side, and so she betrayed my
obligations to my affines." Or a daughter thinks, "My mother should
have kept me near her, but instead I was sent far away." Complaints like
these, in just such words, are common, even though the offender has
acted within the overall rules of the game, only stressing the fulfillment
of his or her own desires.
On the ground are such people with their various longings, supporting
the continuation of the kinship ideal by investing their different personal
dreams in it, but in that very process pulling against each other, making
the possibility of each other's total fulfillment all the more remote. As
long as this ideal answers to the desires that have been written in their
bodies since childhood, they will keep reaching for it, and as long as they
reach, its various imperfect manifestations will continue to be born.

CHAPTER FIVE

Siblings and Spouses

PRELUDE

Like husband and wife, brother and sister share a womb, and share a
home. Brother and sister are born from the same womb («¿an pirantu,
"born together"; cahotarar, "same womb"). Into one womb, husband
and wife pour the strength of their lives. From this womb springs their
mutual future, their continued life. The son is the father's seed, the
daughter the mother's vine—the same seed, the same vine, spouses before, siblings after, and in the next generation, spouses again. Girls marry
at twelve, bear at thirteen. Generations succeed each other rapidly. The
daughter's first pregnancy may precede the mother's last. Lives blossom
and fade quickly. Children reap the fruit of their parents' sowing; karma
goes from father to son of the same seed as easily as from body to body
of the same soul. My parent dies, my child is born, the same soul with the
same habits, the same laugh, male then, female now, later either. Thus
blood lines and soul lines intermingle.
PORUTCELVI

". . .my breath and soul is he who
is the heart-crystal..."
Tirukkovaiyar, 5.
Of all loves, the most tragic love is that shared by orphaned older
brother and younger sister. The brother who raises his sister is both her
parent and her spouse. His shoulders are too small to carry her lightly. He
spends his childhood's energy to keep her. With the help of his toil, she
becomes a full woman, then she flies away, with nary a backward glance,
leaving his nest empty. So the story goes, from the brother's side. The
sister sees it differently. She is driven from her natal home, her mother's
187

188

/

Siblings and Spouses

home, her home, by the evil new woman who steps into her brother's
heart. To the strong love of siblings, marriage is always a betrayal.
Porutcelvi is Ayya's sister. She is about five years younger than he is.
When I meet her, she is in her late thirties. She lives in a tiny one-room
house in a town south of Madras, where she works as a schoolteacher.
Her only child, a teenage daughter, lives with her. Her husband is in the
merchant marine and is away from home most of the time. His picture
hangs over the doorway. Porutcelvi's house is clean and in good repair,
but it has no water supply. Porutcelvi has to hire a woman to bring water
in pots from the river some distance away. When I arrive, she asks me
what I would like to eat, and I tell her whatever she has on hand—dosais
would be good. She has no dosai batter in the house, so against my
protestations she sends to a local restaurant for dosais and is disappointed
when I don't eat them all.
In a corner of the house hangs a collection of fashionable saris. Porutcelvi presses me to accept one of them from her as a gift. I decline,
explaining that I would have no use for it in America. Before I leave she
convinces me to accept a black waistcloth heavily embroidered with gold
thread—a Muslim man's wedding apparel. I can make it into a skirt, she
says. Later I learn that this was the garment her husband wore on their
wedding day.
In the evening, she walks with my little son in her arms until he falls
asleep. While I visit others, she lies down beside him, to comfort him in
case he wakes up. Later, she takes me to visit her friends, politely inquiring about the customs of our country, discoursing on the customs of her
own. She asks me to repeat for her the marriage vows that Westerners
take. She lectures me in limpid, scholarly Tamil about God's care of the
soul. God is like a mother, she says, gently guiding the childlike soul
down the right path, punishing it only to keep it from going astray. In the
morning and in the evening, she performs a worship ceremony in her
home, singing the hundred lines of Manikkavacakar's "Sivapuranam" in
a clear, strong voice that rings through the Muslim neighborhood where
she lives.
Like Anni, Porutcelvi was renamed by Ayya. The name given her at
birth was Lakshmi, the Sanskrit name of the goddess of wealth, Vishnu's
consort. Lakshmi is a very common personal name for women throughout India. But at some point, Ayya had translated his younger sister's
name into Tamil (porul in Tamil means wealth; celvam also means
wealth; her short name, Celvi, is a common one for Saiva women in
Tamil Nadu). The name her brother gave her is the name that she now
goes by.
During hard times, says Porutcelvi, her mother comes to her in

Plate 25.

A village bride.

dreams, to comfort her. When her mother was alive, Porutcelvi did not
have so much affection for her, she says, but Ayya did. There were three
of them, the oldest brother, Ayya (Porutcelvi calls him Annan), and
herself. Their mother became pregnant again when Porutcelvi was very
young. A few days, as Celvi remembers, after the birth of a female child,
her mother came running to her and told her that by dawn the next morning she (the mother) would be dead. She died that night. Ayya fell on top
of the corpse sobbing, so great was his sorrow.
Even from childhood, says Celvi, or at least as early as she can remember, Ayya had great bhakti. From the age of fifteen, or perhaps earlier, he
would undergo attacks of iraipattu (seizure by a deity). There would be
atircci (shock), he would tremble uncontrollably so that no one could
hold him, and run out into the street. His brother would run after him and
bring him back. After that, it took him an hour or two to return to his
senses.
Ayya is by nature a very angry person, says Celvi. That is his
piravikunam, the quality he has had since birth. She said that once when
they were children in their home village, he and his brother climbed a tree
and were playing in it. The older brother tackled Ayya. Ayya climbed
down from the tree, went to his grandmother's house, got some clothes
and money, and went to Madras. He did not come back. Celvi, learning

190

/

Siblings and Spouses

of this, sat down on the steps of the village tank and wept. Their father
said to the older brother, "It is your responsibility to go and find him."
The brother went, and he, too, did not return. Celvi and her father went
to Madras to look for them. In the Saidapet police station, they found the
older brother. He had been working in a restaurant. Ayya had found a job
making tali strings.
Their father and their first older brother were both very cruel; one
could not expect love from them, said Celvi. The father believed that
women should not study—that was the belief of those times. But Ayya,
by his own labor, grinding rice batter and sewing, had put her through
school. Celvi, Ayya, the older brother, and the father had all lived together in Madras. The father worked and Ayya also worked, earning
twenty-five to thirty rupees a day sewing, which was quite a lot of money
in those times.
However Ayya is, she is that way too, says Celvi. Whatever he believes, she also believes. He has-become more famous than she, only
because he has studied more. If anything happens to Ayya, she knows,
and if anything happens to her Ayya knows. There is a kind of connection
between their hearts. The oldest brother is not connected with them in
this way.
I ask Celvi, what does she think are the conditions that caused her
brother to be as he is? She talks for a while about the importance of the
company of good people (nallar curat). Then, mysteriously, she relates
the life stoiy of the Saiva saint Cuntar, who had reached Kailasa and the
feet of God but had descended from the mountain once, noticed two girls,
and thought them both beautiful. For this lapse, God punished Cuntar by
making him be born on earth again. The two girls became his wives.
Cuntar wept, "How can I ever regain your holy feet, now that I have lost
them?"
Celvi wrote a poem to Padmini, Ayya's wife. Before he was married,
Celvi said, Ayya knew only physical pain. When you take a soft fruit and
repeatedly beat it, what will happen? So it was with Ayya's heart after his
marriage. She said she wrote this poem when she observed Ayya and
Padmini fighting and could not bear it.
In love he did not grow
He grew love, and held it.
He cherished work. In the world
He lived as a great man.
In school he did not study but
He sang garlands of songs.
To words he gave the soul of words. In high
Words and deeds he dwelt.

Siblings and Spouses

/

191

He lived respected by the learned. Even in dreams
The learned he respected.
His feelings he protected; imperishable
Discipline he guarded.
He hated his kin; in justice
He fed his own.
You gave him your tie—O God—
He grew the bond.
Why did you make him your kin? Why
Did you hurt his tender heart?
Pacattil valaravillai—avan
pacattai valarttuk kondan.
Uraippaiye penivantan—ulakil
uttamanay varntu vantan.
Palliyil padikkavillai—anal
pamalaipadi vantan.
Collukku col uyir koduttan—uyar
collilum ceyalilum avan iruntan.
Karravar matikka vantan—kanavilum
karravarai matittu vantan.
Unarvukalai kattu vantan—ariyata
orukkattai kattu vantan.
Currattai veruttu vantan—nermaiyil
contattai mantiruntan.
Pantattai ni koduttay—iraiva
pacattai avan valarttan.
Uravai en koduttay—menmai
ullattai en nokavidday?
Of Porutcelvi, Ayya says, he does not worry about her. She has
enough self-confidence to look after herself. Besides, she has made her
own choices. She married a man of whom Ayya did not approve.
Once, according to Ayya, he went to spend the night at his sister's
house. Her husband was not there. Late at night, in the rain, the husband
came and knocked at the door. Ayya said he called out, "Who is that
knocking in the middle of the night?" The husband, hearing Ayya's voice
and fearing to enter (since it is wrong to be out at all hours) did not answer
but slept in the rain. In the morning, when Celvi saw this, she said to
Ayya, "Don't you want me to be with my husband?" Because of her
saying this, Ayya says, he will no longer enter her house. "I will not stand
between you and your husband," he reports that he said. She, who knew
him well, was wrong to think that he would not let her husband in the
house.
"I raised my sister from the time she was three until the time she was

192

/

Siblings and Spouses

Plate 26. Ayya relaxes in Peruveli.
twenty-two," Ayya said, "About nineteen years. I carried her on my
shoulders, I combed her hair and braided it and put flowers in it. If a
parent raises a child so lovingly, and then sees someone beating the child,
how painful it will be for the parent. So I saw her husband strike her, and
when I saw that I went to strike her husband, but she stopped me, saying,
'Who are you to come between a husband and his wife?'
" 'That's right,' I thought, 'Who am I?' The words ring a thousand
times inside my heart."
PADMINI

" . . . for you are like the tiger-town,
o bright-browed one . . . "
Tirukkdvaiyar, 126.
By all accounts, both-Padmini and Ayya were hot-tempered people,
and they were at their hottest in their showdowns with each other. Padmini provoked Ayya, for whom verbal elegance was a sacred value, by
addressing him sarcastically as swami and unrespectfully as ni. Ayya
provoked Padmini by saying things like "All women are dogs," or "I see
that bed loves you so much it won't let you go," and mocking her emaciated body. During that year, in my presence, they were constantly at each

Siblings and Spouses

Plate 27.

/

193

Padmini.

other, so that I wondered how either of them could stand it. Other members of the family also expressed distress at their quarreling and angry
natures. But they said that Padmini and Ayya had always been like this.
In fact, in the past, they had been worse.
In Ayya's case, no explanation seemed needed; anger was just a quality he was bom with ("his cupavam," said Attai; "his piravi kunam," said
Porutcelvi). But for Padmini's angry nature, they sought explanations,
perhaps because she was in the house with them more. An uncomfortable
silence fell over the family when Padmini lost her temper, scolded an
adult, beat a child or servant. Attai said, distressed, that no matter how
much they told her that it was wrong to get angry like this, when they told

194

/

Siblings and Spouses

her, she would pout and her anger would not go away. Anni said, angry
herself at the time, that Padmini lost her temper often because she always
thought she was right and would never defer (paniya) to others.
Padmini, besides being short-tempered, was very thin, and people saw
a link between these qualities of hers. Because she was thin and weak, she
had a short temper. Because she burned herself out in anger, she grew
thin. According to Padmini's mother, both the anger and the thinness
began at the time Padmini had typhoid, when she was twenty-one years
old. She showed me a photograph of a plump and smiling little girl—
Padmini at the age of ten.
As Padmini came through the noonday sun alone one day, bringing
him lunch, Ayya said he was worried about her, she was growing even
thinner. He said he had spent thirty rupees to buy medicine for her. He
said that getting so much money out of him was like sqeezing water from
a dry cloth (and he wrung his veshtie tightly in angry illustration); he
made so much effort for her and then she ate only one or two pills and left
the rest.
Padmini, having arrived, hearing this, said that she didn't take any
medicine, for there was nothing wrong with her.
Ayya said that he worked hard to see that the family was well taken
care of; if they wouldn't take care of themselves, what was he to do?
But from my point of view, Padmini was only mirroring Ayya, for he
also refused to take medicine, or to rest when he was ill. In the same way,
though he said he thought she should wear gold jewelery, she refused,
because she had decided to be "simple" (elimai) like him. Ayya valued
hard work and thought of himself as a hard worker, but he wanted his
wife to stay at home. Then after he (against her expressed wishes) had
constructed a rice mill, she (against his expressed wishes) went to work
in it. Her defiance on one level could be seen on another level as admiration, support, and trust.
The idea that there was something hidden in Padmini, and yet that
there was nothing hidden, preoccupied Ayya. He often said, "She harbors
nothing in her mind," meaning no secrets, no grudges, every thought
immediately spoken and gone, every wish immediately expressed and
forgotten. But he also liked to say of Padmini, "She is like a jackfruit."
The jackfruit has a very sweet, sticky inside covered by a hard, spiky
shell. Thus to Ayya, Padmini was the same inside and outside, and yet
she was different.
Such ambiguities pervaded their relationship. When, in Ayya's mind,
Padmini did wrong, and he criticized her, and she wouldn't listen, he
would punish himself (and, indirectly, her) by fasting for days. He said

Siblings and Spouses

/

195

that he was punishing himself for making her persist in her wrongdoing
by telling her not to do it. The distinction between the wrongdoer and the
victim, the punished and the punisher, was completely lost. Thus in his
punishment, he bound himself to her.
Padmini would criticize Ayya and disobey him, but when others joined
her in the attack, she would rush to his defense. For instance, she said that
immediately after Jnana Oli was born she had decided to have a tubal
ligation, though Ayya had said he did not want her to, because she was
already so weak. She asked the advice of her obstetrician, a woman. The
obstetrician said that she could certainly have an operation if she wanted
one. Padmini said that after the operation, she had felt something like a
large hard ball in her belly. She was afraid to tell Ayya because he might
scold her. I told her I thought it would be wrong for a husband to scold his
sick wife. Padmini answered, defending him, that he would never attack
her when she was ill; he would only say, "I told you so." When Ayya was
absent, Padmini would never criticize him, beyond lamenting that he
criticized her. She would only disparage and fight with him when he was
around.
Ayya treated Padmini reciprocally. When she was absent, the things
he said about her were highly laudatory. He made her sound almost
mythic in her wifeliness.
A story he liked to tell his new friends concerned the manner in which
he had gotten married. He said that as a young man he had never wanted
to get married; he wanted only to lead the life of an ascetic. But wellmeaning friends wanted him to marry and, to humor them, he had gone
around with them to visit the various eligible girls they had in mind for
him. One of these girls was Padmini. Later he had forgotten all about her
and all the other girls, he said, but she had remembered him. After having
seen him, she had vowed to marry no one but him and had herself adopted
an ascetic way of life, in imitation of him. She had surprised her parents
by saying, "I no longer want gold bangles; earthen bangles are enough for
me." Though her parents tried to get her to marry others, for seven years
she had remained steadfast in her resolve to consider no other bridegroom. When she had reached the age of twenty-one, still unmarried,
Attai and Anni had gone to a great Saiva festival to beseech Ayya to
marry her. They had worn sacred ash, and they had approached him,
unknowingly, at a sacred time and in a sacred place by the temple. Attai
had wept, prostrating herself before him, and had told him that if he
refused to marry this girl, she would remain forever unmarried. Moved
by Attai's tears, Ayya had consented to be Padmini's husband.
I would never be able to find out how much of this story was "true" in

196

/

Siblings and Spouses

our sense of the word. I think it had a certain truth of the heart. It echoed
the story of Siva and Parvati's courtship, and I think it was important to
Ayya that his marriage be thought of in this way. Anyway, Siva and
Parvati also had their spats. But nonmythic history sometimes moved in
on Ayya's memories and forced him to revise them.
When I visited Padmini's parents in Malaiyanur, I was sitting by myself on the porch, and a child asked me if I would like to see some family
pictures. I said yes. The child went into a back room and brought out a
stack of old photographs. Among them was a wedding picture: two teenaged brides, flanked by two very ugly bridegrooms. Standing between the
two brides was the four-year-old (by my estimate) Anuradha. One of the
brides was Lalita, Padmini's slightly older sister, who still lived in Malaiyanur. The other bride was clearly Padmini herself. A neighbor had
entered, and I asked her who the man was standing next to Padmini. In
hushed tones the neighbor said, "That was Padmini's husband. He is
dead."
I was surprised, because in all my questioning of the family about its
history, no one had ever hinted at this first marriage of Padmini's. How
many other events of the past had been concealed from me? When I
returned, I asked Ayya about the photograph. This is the story that he told
me at that time:
When Padmini was younger, she was introduced to Ayya as a potential
bridegroom. Ayya himself was not interested in marriage and forgot this
incident, but Padmini remembered and got the idea that she would marry
only him. Anni and Annan, with whom she was living, also wanted her
to marry Ayya. Ayya agreed to do so. Meanwhile, however, Padmini's
parents had other plans. They had heard that a certain family was very
wealthy, and they had decided to marry Padmini and Lalita to two brothers in this family. Annan and Anni, not wishing to oppose Padmini's
parents and feeling that the decision should rest finally with them, had let
the parents have their way. They had asked Ayya if he would come to the
wedding and Ayya had said certainly he would come. But when he arrived and saw the bridegroom, his mind began to burn. It was clear to
him, he said, that Padmini's bridegroom was very ill with tuberculosis.
When Padmini saw Ayya, she had begun to weep. Then Ayya knew that
she did not want to marry this person. He sent word to someone saying,
"Don't think it is because I was to marry Padmini that I say this. The
bridegroom is very sick. For the sake of both her health and his, he should
not be allowed to come near her. If you don't believe me, take him to a
doctor and do what the doctor says."
Ayya said that he was furious with Padmini's parents for risking her

Siblings and Spouses

/

197

health for the sake of money. As soon as the ceremonies were over, they
took the bridegroom to a doctor, and the doctor said that the groom should
go immediately to the hospital. He did not spend even the wedding night
with Padmini, said Ayya. Padmini knew not even one day of married life
with him. He remained in the hospital while Padmini returned to Anni's
house. The groom was not an evil man, said Ayya. The events that
occurred were not his fault. He died within a few months of the wedding.
After that, Padmini got typhoid. There was talk of sending her to Lalita's
house where she could earn her keep as a servant. Then Ayya had married
her. (By my reckoning, there was a hiatus of at least four years between
Padmini's first and second weddings.)
I asked Ayya why he hadn't told me previously that he had married the
widowed Padmini—from my point of view, this was a fine thing that he
had done. He said, no, it was a very small thing. Why was I making so
much of it? He said that he had already told me about this event, but that
he had told me in a hidden way.
I wondered what Ayya was referring to. About a week before, he had
been talking about the desirability of widow remarriage. He had said that
lower castes allowed a woman to marry a second time; higher castes
should also. "If a girl is married at fourteen and widowed at nineteen, can
we expect her to stay as she is? Is her only desire to put food on people's
plates? Having no husband, she will find love somewhere, and bring the
family shame. In the household, the only men will be her brother, her
father, and the servant. She will embrace the servant. Rather than letting
this happen, it is better that she be allowed to remarry."
Ayya said that he had known such a girl. A man had been asked to
marry her but had said to Ayya, "How could I marry a woman that
another man has known?"
Ayya had said to the man, "You think she is the only one who has been
with another man? How do you know that a previously unmarried girl will
be so pure? She most likely has had a lover, too. The only difference is
that you know about this one, you don't know about that one." Thus Ayya
said that he had convinced the man to marry the widow.
When Ayya had told me this story, I had not given it much thought.
Now it occurred to me that perhaps this story was the one through which
Ayya had told me the truth "in a hidden way." Perhaps the man he had
talked into marrying a widow was no one but himself.
We return now to the scene in which Padmini is bringing Ayya his
lunch, and Ayya is criticizing her for not taking her medicine.
For about three days, Ayya himself had been ill with a bad case of
diarrhea. He was weak and dehydrated. They had finally convinced him

198

/

Siblings and Spouses

to visit the house of the doctor, where he had defecated in his clothes, but
still he would not take his medicine, the same medicine he had forced
me to take when I was ill with the same disease, and which had quickly
cured me.
Saturday night Ayya spent alone in his ashram. When we visited him
Sunday morning he said smilingly that he had lain awake during the night
thinking about the fact that when you are well, everyone stays around
you, but when you are sick, and really need someone near you, no one is
there.
Padmini came in the morning and again in the afternoon, bringing him
lunch. An argument mounted between Padmini and Ayya, Ayya voicing
his most common complaint, that Padmini spoke harshly (kadimaiyaka)
and saying that at least when she was serving food it should be sweet
(inimaiyaka). Padmini responded, "How am I supposed to speak when as
soon as I come in the door you say you don't care whether I come in or
not." The argument escalated, with Ayya still criticizing Padmini. "Any
work you do, you should do right; any work I do, I do right," he said,
until Padmini was in tears and Ayya announced that he was leaving for
Madras, though he was still quite ill. Padmini grabbed his bag to keep him
from leaving. Ayya grabbed it away from her. Padmini blocked the door;
Ayya took her by the shoulders and pushed her to the floor. Padmini
appealed to me, "What have I done wrong? You have been here three
months, have you seen me do anything wrong?" She looked at Ayya. He
said, "Do I have to tell you?" His eyes were lowered.
I asked him, "What kind of a teacher [aciriyar] are you?"
"I am a small man [ciriyar], as you can see," he replied, "a very small
man."
But only when I threatened to return to America did Ayya agree to
stay. Padmini went to the rice mill under construction nearby and sat
down weeping. I went to comfort her.
Padmini said to me, "He says I have a sickness and should drink
medicine. I have no sickness. The reason I am thin is that I have no peace
of mind. My husband says I'm no good, my sister says I'm no good, my
uncle says I'm no good, my brother says I'm no good."
Ayya came bringing a blanket and a pillow, smiling, and said ironically as he looked at me with my arm around Padmini, "This is a beautiful
sight." He told Padmini, who was sitting in a corner weeping, that if she
must cry, she must do it properly, lying on a blanket. He said to me,
"There are some things a man should not talk about." I said, "Don't talk
about them then." Ayya said, "At least when making love and serving
food a woman should be sweet." Padmini was silent. He continued to

Siblings and Spouses

/

199

talk. At last Padmini was asleep, lying on her side on the blanket, her thin
body curled around her husband's knee.
I left them there in the rice mill. They returned to the ashram after some
time. Padmini fed me the rest of my lunch, then left. After she left Ayya
said to me, "I have given you a chance to see Padmini's true nature, what
happens when her feelings come strongly [viraivaka]. As I told you, she
harbors no evil thoughts."
I said to him, "Her heart is higher than yours."
"That is right," he said, "A good artist, a good actor, must be able to
go very low, as well as very high." He said that he had put on this
performance for Padmini's sake.
MOHANA

" . . . come back gently into your old home . . . "
Tirukkovaiyar, 126.
Ayya's other sister is Mohana. She is his sister not by shared descent
but by marriage, being his wife's father's sister's daughter. But though
she is not his blood kin, he feels responsible for her. He doesn't worry
about Celvi, he says, but he worries about Mohana, because Mohana
does not have the will to do battle for herself.
Mohana's mother was the youngest of five children. The father of
Anni and Padmini was bom immediately before her. After she was married, she was told that she would never be able to bear children, and she
was childless for fifteen years. During this period she adopted Anni, her
older brother's first daughter. Anni says that this aunt had an angry nature, like Padmini. But she raised Anni lovingly, like a daughter, beating
her to make her eat, and Anni reached the age of twelve not knowing how
to do any kind of housework.
After fifteen years of childlessness this aunt gave birth to Mohana.
Nine months later she was pregnant again. After a full-term pregnancy,
she died in childbirth. The baby also died.
Anni, now twelve, returned to live with her own parents. Mohana's
father remarried. But he was not such a loving man, says Anni, and the
new wife did not care properly for the children.
Kanakkamma, Mohana's mother's older sister, was widowed. She had
one grown son, and she desired to have other children in the house. So
she adopted Mohana, together with Padmini and Padmini's younger
brother Bhakta. The three of them were very small children at the time.
When Anni reached the age of seventeen, she was married to Kanakkamma's son. Padmini and Mohana continued to grow up in this household, raised by Padmini's older sister Anni and her husband. When Pad-

200

/

Siblings and Spouses

mini married, she continued to live with her husband, Ayya, in this same
household, because Ayya had broken off all ties with his natal kin and
was a good friend of Anni's husband. It was Anni and her husband who
had chosen him to be Padmini's spouse.
When it came time for Mohana to marry, she expressed a desire to
marry Tambu, one of the brothers of Anni and Padmini. Thus she would
be able to maintain ties with the household in which she had been raised,
though she would have to live in the home of her parents-in-law, Anni
and Padmini's parents. According to Ayya, Anni and Padmini tried to
dissuade Mohana from marrying Tambu, because Tambu had many bad
habits and could not be expected to be a responsible husband. But Mohana insisted, and so they let her have her way.
Two years after she was married, Mohana gave birth to Sivamani. The
delivery was hard. Ayya blamed Sivamani himself. "When delivery is
difficult," he said, "it's a bad sign. If a child starts life by giving his
mother trouble, he's likely to give her trouble forever."
Sivamani was not a healthy baby, and he came at a bad time. "It was
raining heavily," said Anni. "Padmini had just given birth [to Jnana Oli].
I had typhoid. We all thought that Sivamani was going to die."
"He would throw up everything he ate," said Padmini, "large quantities of vomit. And he wouldn't open his eyes. We carried him through the
mud and rain to the bus stop. We took him to big doctors all around
Madras, but he didn't get better. We all thought he was going to die.
Finally we took him to see our family doctor. He put some Terramycin on
a piece of cotton and rubbed it on Sivamani's eyes. Soon his eyes opened.
The doctor prescribed white goat's milk, boiled and strained three times,
and rice water, for him to drink. Now Sivamani is fine. Our doctor is a
golden doctor."
As she told this story, Padmini thwacked Sivamani on the back. He
toppled over and she kissed him. "Don't you ever do that to us again," she
said. Sivamani laughed.
Ayya said, "Padmini's brother [Sivamani's father] has a sore on his
penis. It has become infected and he is going to have to have an operation.
I know what that disease is. You may have noticed that Sivamani has a
very short penis, as though it had been sawed off. When he grows up, he
will have trouble. That is because of the disease he got from his father.
His sickness after he was born was also a result of this. When I told this
to the family, they all became angry with me. So I didn't say anything
else. We ourselves bore the expense of Sivamani's treatment. We took
him from doctor to doctor. Shouldn't a father help care for his newborn
son? Sivamani's father said, 'It doesn't matter to me whether he dies.'
When we took Sivamani to our own doctor, the doctor was irritated. He

Siblings and Spouses

/

201

said, 'Why didn't you bring him here first?' Anni and Padmini were
ashamed and said, 'We went to the places one is supposed to go.' He
examined Sivamani and looked at the medicine the other doctor had prescribed and said, 'He is giving him thisT He also said, 'Because of a fault
in the father, the child also has this fault.' He said it in a civilized way, not
spelling out the trouble directly, because Anni and Padmini were there.
Padmini and Anni said, 'The younger one [their name for Ayya] said it
was a disease caused in this way.' The doctor smiled at me and said, 'You
have understood the matter correctly.' "
Mohana's duty as an honorable woman is to live with her parents-inlaw and help them with work in the house and fields. But she spends as
much time as she can in the household of Anni and Padmini. Tambu
comes there occasionally too. When he visits, he is like a ghost. People
act as though he is not there. Most of the time, only Mohana will serve
him meals.
Mohana comes to Ayya to talk with him about her husband Tambu.
Tambu is a petty thief. When he visits the home he takes money out of
people's bags. "Anni has not spoken to him in how many years?" asks
Mohana, rhetorically. But when Tambu enters the hospital for his operation, Padmini visits him daily and brings him meals. Ayya is furious. He
says it is a waste of his own hard-earned money to feed a man like Tambu.
Padmini's answer is simple. "Tambu is my brother," she says. "If he is
sick in the hospital, how can I not feed him?"
When Mohana was orphaned, her parents left her eight acres of land in
Malaiyanur, the village where her parents-in-law live. Tambu uses part of
the income from this land to support himself. Because he will not assist
with the agricultural work or contribute any income from outside employment, his own parents no longer allow him to stay in their house. He has
built himself a rough mud hut next to his parents' house. He sleeps there
sometimes, when he has nowhere else to go.
Meanwhile, Tambu's parents have sold two acres of Mohana's land
and plan to sell more. What they have not sold, they cultivate, keeping the
income for themselves. When Mohana is in her parents-in-law's house,
she is alone with them and her brothers-in-law. She is not able to confront
them all and demand her land. If she refuses to sign away more land to
them, life will be made difficult for her in their house. If she decides
to settle permanently in Anni's house, Tambu will take it as a sign that
he, too, can permanently settle there, and it will be very hard to get rid
of him.
Ayya says that Mohana's only recourse is to fight with her parents-inlaw, get her land back so that she will have an income of her own, and live
by herself in a separate house in Malaiyanur. Ayya says that if he were

202

/

Siblings and Spouses

Mohana, he (she) would leave Tambu and marry someone else. Mohana
has seen a movie in which the wayward husband eventually straightens
out because his wife is patient and forebearing. Mohana hopes that if she
is patient, Tambu will reform as the movie husband did. Ayya says that
she will leam to hate that movie.
Ayya says further that if Mohana decides to fight for her land he will
support her, but it is a decision that she herself must make. He will not
decide for her. He has learned from bad experience with his uterine sister
not to try and intervene between husband and wife, unless the wife herself
puts up a fight and asks for support.
A heated discussion takes place, with Anni and Padmini on one side,
Ayya on the other, and Mohana weeping in the middle. Anni says that
Mohana must fight with her parents-in-law to get back her land, but
that she cannot do it without the support of Ayya and Annan. Ayya says
that Mohana must decide for herself what to do. She does not need her
brothers' permission to act. Anni continues to press him. Finally, greatly
agitated, he says, "If you want your land and they won't give it to you,
whether it is your father-in-law or God, we will come there and fight for
you."
The next day, Anni, Mohana, and I set out for Malaiyanur. Neither
Ayya nor Annan comes along. A long discussion takes place between
Anni and her mother. Her father sleeps nearby, evidently unconcerned
about the conversation. Nothing is resolved. Anni and I leave Malaiyanur
the next day, while Mohana and Sivamani stay behind.
When they are together in Anni's house, Mohana and Padmini play
and joke together often. Mohana, less confident than Padmini, is Padmini's shadow, following her example, playing her straight man. One
evening, Padmini slips her arm around Mohana's waist and summons
me. "Decide," she commands, "which of us is the greater beauty." I
inspect their ears, their fingernails, and the backs of their necks, and
proclaim a tie. Padmini protests, "That woman is very black and she has
a gap between her teeth. You judge unfairly." Both of them grin widely.
Padmini says that as children, she and Mohana used to play husband
and wife. I ask her how a female could play the part of a husband; Anni
comments that she has asked the same thing. Padmini does not answer,
but tightly embraces Mohana and declares that she will marry her today.
Mohana giggles.
Padmini and Mohana like to lie side-by-side in the afternoon or evening, sharing a narrow bed, sharing a pulp magazine, sharing whispered
secrets. "I know what you're doing," says Anni, with a note of disapproval in her voice.

Siblings and Spouses

/

203

One day in the garden Padmini says to Ayya, "Last night when no one
was there I crept up on Mohana who was sleeping and put my arms
around her and she screamed."
Ayya sometimes criticizes Mohana and Padmini for "playing too
much." He often mocks Mohana's mild lisp. He says he feels a "burning"
0ericcal) when Padmini and Mohana spend twenty-four hours a day together and Padmini won't be separated from Mohana even briefly, but he
says he would feel the same jealousy if Padmini spent too much time with
her mother, and he makes no more of it.
Padmini and Mohana's husband-wife game, carried with them from
childhood, is more than just a game now that they are adults. Mohana is
in many ways like a real wife to Padmini. She humors her, delouses her,
accepts her jokes, admires her, never criticizes her. When there is extra
work to be done, Mohana does it. When there is a decision to be made,
she passes it up to Padmini or Anni. There is a very clear hierarchy among
the women in this respect. Yet in other respects, they are equals, or even
images of each other. Ayya often speaks of Padmini and Anni as though
they were a balanced set, each complementing the other. But in their own
eyes, Padmini and Mohana form a team, while Anni is a match for Ayya.
Padmini and Mohana are built the same, and all their clothing is shared.
When they go out, each carries the other's child. In the evening, each puts
flowers in the other's hair.
Their eating together is a strange and beautiful ritual. They wait until
all the others are finished, then they put the leftovers in a pot and Padmini
mixes them up with her hand. They sit down facing each other, with the
pot between them. Padmini takes a handful of food, shapes the food into
a ball in her palm, and puts the food-ball in her mouth, then she makes a
ball of food and puts it in Mohana's mouth, then Mohana does the same.
There are no "manners." They wolf down great mouthfuls. One would
say that they were eating like animals, except for the rhythmic and balanced way in which each feeds herself and the other. They do not play the
game of trying to get each other to eat more than their fill. When one says
"Enough," the other leaves off feeding her. When both are done, each
woman licks the other's fingers and her own.
One afternoon as Anni is leaving for a wedding, Mohana and Sivamani
arrive from Malaiyanur. Padmini greets Mohana, not with bubbling joy
but with an exchange of news. Mohana has a drink of water, then Padmini
feeds her by hand, making balls of rice and vegetables and putting them
one by one into Mohana's mouth. Padmini has just eaten, so Mohana
does not feed her.
Sivamani and Jnana Oli stand staring at each other. Annan takes one

204

/

Siblings and Spouses

on each knee, places a toy truck between them, and kisses each in turn.
He sits with the children on his knees, while Padmini and Mohana talk.
Then the older children rush in and all grab Sivamani at once, pulling him
this way and that. At last, Padmini picks up Sivamani and walks away
with him in her arms.
PATTERNS

Nattanar and nattanar, sister and wife of the same man, may be the most
bitter rivals or they may be the most intimate friends. Padmini and Porutcelvi compete for the affection of the same beloved man. They despise
each other. Padmini and Mohana are bonded to a man who steals from
both of them. They are lovers. Of course, the situation is not really as
cut-and-dried as this. Each relationship that a person belongs to affects
each of that person's other relationships. And there are kinds and degrees
of influence of bond upon bond. The form that a web of kinbonds takes
varies according to the personalities at the nodes. So personality structure
and kinship structure are also interlinked systems.
Males and females form opposed interest groups, just as do different
lineages, just as do different generations. The strong feelings joining
members of one sex are said to have a bodily basis, just like the feelings
joining sibling to sibling (rattapacam, "blood bond"), or parent to child
(petta unarcci, "birth feeling"), or wife to husband (palunarcci, "sexual
feeling"). Females are said to be all of one caste (inam). Their bodies are
the same. There are feelings that only they know. They sometimes form
alliances against men. As competitors for the same prizes, they sometimes fight one another.
It may be that the core ambiguities of family life arise at the points of
collision, or intersection, between different kinds of love bonding different kinds of people. When the blood bond and the sexual bond divide a
single person, then that person may well question his own identity. When
the bond within a sex crosses the bond between sexes, androgyny may
result. When the parental bond and the sexual bond cross, tender and
murderous feelings may merge. And yet all these various bonds, far from
being kept separate, are drawn dangerously or (as the case may be) deliciously close by South Indian cultural patterns. In the matter of kinship,
as in many other matters, the people of Tamil Nadu seem to relish walking close to the edge.

CHAPTER SIX

Older Women and
Younger Men

ANNI

". . . he who is hidden,
whom the gods do not know . . . "
Tirukkovaiyar, 5.
It often seemed that the net of love was cast beyond the closest person,
perhaps, as with parents spurning their children, in order to keep the
circle of love wide, or conversely, to create an illusion of indifference or
to divert attention away from the true, more inner love. The person that
Padmini loved most, said Anni and Attai, was not Padmini's own husband, Ayya, but her mama—"mother's brother" as she called him,
though technically he was not this—Anni's husband. In the whole family, this "mama" was the only one she never scolded, they said. As for
Anni, in front of me she paid little attention to her husband and devoted
herself to the care of Ayya.
"Anni, annan, anu, anukkam," said Ayya, "Brother's wife, brother,
the subtle, drawing near," so creating an etymology for the name of the
woman he called Anni. "My Anni loves me better than my wife," he said.
To Anni, Ayya was koruntan, husband's younger brother, younger
sister's husband. Koruntan is close to kurantai, "child," and might best
be translated as "the tender one," for in her husband's younger brother,
a woman may find a tender Mend, one who can be her baby, while in his
older brother's wife, a man may find a woman who is like a mother,
sister, and secret wife. So an old man who labored in the fields for the
family used to sing as he was drawing water, "Anni, Anni, you bring
water to my brother to cool his thirst, won't you bring the same water to
me?" And there is a proverb which says, "My older brother's wife is my
205

206

/

Older Women and Younger Men

half wife, and my younger brother's wife is my own [Annan manaivi arai
martaivi, tampi manaivi tan manaivi]" But when I asked Ayya if there
was a traditional love relationship between an anni and her koruntan, he
looked stunned, horrified. "No matter what happens, I will never reveal
my secrets," he said.
The respect and closeness that Anni and Ayya felt for each other were
evident. They enjoyed conversing and debating with each other. From
what I could see, more words were exchanged between them than between any other two members of the household. Often they went shopping together. Then they would walk along the street chatting. Sometimes
they would go to the city together. Then on the long train ride to Madras,
Anni would tell Ayya every detail of all the things that had happened in
the household while he had been at work. When Ayya went alone to
Madras, Anni would wait up at night for him to return. When he arrived
she would serve him dinner and they would stay up conversing long after
all others were asleep. After lunch Anni and Ayya would lie together in
the afternoon in the main room talking, their heads sharing a pillow, their
bodies perpendicular to one another. At night, too, they would sometimes
sleep side-by-side. Neither Anni nor Ayya was ever seen reclining with
any other person., male or female. Each stood somewhat apart and alone.
Anni took her name, the name that even her own children called her
now, from her relationship with Ayya. Him she would call "Annan",
"older brother," or "Ayya," which means "lord" or "father" or "husband,"
thus confusing many who first met the two of them together. "How can
you call him Annan when he calls you Anni?" people would ask. Anni
would answer, "Parakkam."
Before he set out to Madras to give a talk, Anni would help Ayya
prepare his lesson. Only she knew by heart all the hymns that he sang
during worship and had tried to teach the family. When Ayya was planning to give away a notebook of poems he had written, Anni protested.
She wanted at least the songs written in his own hand—lovesongs he had
composed not long after entering the household.
It was because of Anni's great lovingness, said Ayya one day, that he
had married into the household in the first place. He praised her unschooled wisdom. "She watches everyone from a distance," he said, "and
she knows everything that happens. She is wiser than me. The only
difference is that she hasn't studied and doesn't use lovely words like me,
otherwise people would be taking lessons from her."
When I reported to Anni what Ayya had said, she became embarrassed
and denied it, but in fact, Anni often entered into the lessons that Ayya
taught and became through him, transformed by him, a teacher in her own

right. When he spoke in his lectures, as he often did, of "the women in
our house," he was speaking principally of Anni. "Women in the house
are like naniyarkal, people of holy wisdom," he said. "That is why we
call them madappendir." (Madam means innocent, and madappendlr are
innocent women. But madam also means monastery, the place where
supposedly holy men dwell.)
Ayya told his listeners what Anni had told him about the broom. He
told them what she had said about the fruit tree. He told them about a time
he had gotten a thorn in his foot. "Don't you have enough sense to keep
out of thorn beds?" Anni had said as she had dug at the thorn. But Ayya
had yelped in pain as she dug and Anni had said, "All right, let it work
itself out."
"And later it did come out by itself," said Ayya. "Thus Anni taught me
that God removes our sins gradually, to avoid causing us more pain than
we can stand. God comes in many forms," he concluded, "Why can't
God come in the form of one's anni?" Thus Ayya's friends called Anni
"our guru's guru" in a manner that was only half-joking.
Ayya's favorite poet, next to Manikkavacakar and Tiruvalluvar, was
the nineteenth-century Saiva saint Ramalingar. He conducted a series of
lectures about this saint and dreamed, he said, of being "the Ramalingar

208

/

Older Women and Younger Men

of this century." In the legend of Ramalingar's life, he is a social misfit,
so tender-hearted that he weeps for a stone, raging against the evils of the
world, the most terrible of which is flesh-eating, scorning human company, spurning conventions, fleeing marital love, a great poet with no
schooling. Throughout his life he remains a precocious child, orphaned
and alone, with no one to understand him or take care of him, except for
his older brother's wife, who shelters him in her home, feeds him, and
protects him from the world. "Like me, poor Ramalingar had a loving
anni," said Ayya.
Ayya would often contrast Anni's wisdom with his wife's simplicity.
He described Anni's activities as pakkuvam, a word meaning ripeness,
fitness, cookedness, in the proper time and place, to the appropriate degree, but also (interestingly) hiddenness, sneakiness, opportunism. This
was a quality that Padmini lacked. Thus, in discussing the contrast between the two of them, Ayya would say:
"Anni appears to work hard, but quietly [pakkuvamaka] she takes care
of herself. Padmini doesn't."
"In our household, when someone serves us, it is the custom to give
something in return. Padmini gives unlimited amounts. Anni gives within
limits."
"Anni is patient. Padmini wants everything when she wants it."
"Anni hides information that might show her to be dependent upon
others. Padmini hides nothing."
"When I ask Padmini to do something, she either does it or she refuses.
Anni says she will do it, then quietly [pakkuvamaka] she does the opposite."
"Watch out for Anni. If there are a hundred people in a crowd, she will
know if one of them is hiding something."
Clearly for Ayya, Anni understood the nature of the hidden. She knew
what others were hiding, and she herself knew how to hide things. Her
behavior, therefore, was rarely straightforward. Padmini rebelled; Anni
submitted. But one felt that Padmini's rebellion arose, in part, from a
frustrated desire to please her husband. Even when she did please him, he
would conceal his pleasure under anger, real or feigned, and so manipulate her. Anni, in contrast, controlled Ayya by serving him.
Unlike Padmini, Anni would not buy a new sari for herself, nor—
although she would wear old saris passed on to her by younger women—
would she accept the gift of a new sari from anyone but Ayya. Such a
policy was a strong statement of devotion and humility, but it was also a
challenge to Ayya, her loving adversary. When I asked Anni why she
wouldn't wear the sari I bought her, she said that she was waiting for

Older Women and Younger Men

/

209

Ayya to buy her saris, it was his duty to do so, and he was to buy two at
a time, so that she could change them.
Similarly, Anni would never go to a movie without Ayya, even if the
whole rest of the family was going. She would instead make her pleasure
contingent upon his decision and plead with him to go, "so that the whole
family can be together."
Most interesting to watch were the feeding games that took place between Ayya and Anni.
"The Elder One is patient," said Anni. "Whatever you serve him,
however you serve him, he will eat. But Ayya has to be served correctly,
or he will pick up his leaf and hurl it away. Correctly means everything
has to be right there—buttermilk, ghee, rice, salt, lentils—so that he will
be served fast, otherwise he will get up before you serve him.
"But Ayya knows how to serve himself. The Elder One doesn't. Even
if everything is cooked, the Elder One doesn't know how to serve it to the
family. Ayya will cook it and serve it."
Ayya said that it was Anni's "job" (velai) to feed him, and feed him
properly. He often complained to Anni, to his friends, and to me that she
did her job poorly. She would fix him buttermilk and he would say that
he was sick and wanted only rice water. So she would fix him rice water
and then he would tell her that she was too lazy to fix decent meals. She
would complain about how exacting he was but always she strove to cook
to his taste. Daily she cooked for him, as for the rest of the family, and
brought him food. Unless she left him alone with it, he would refuse it,
saying that he didn't like that kind of food, that it was not good for him,
that he had a stomach ache, that he wasn't hungry. Anni would argue and
coax for a while, insisting that the food was fine and good for him. If he
still refused to eat she would force feed him as though he were a recalcitrant child, holding the back of his head with her left hand and bringing
a ball of food to his mouth with her right. He would keep his lips tightly
shut until the last second, when he would open his mouth, and in went the
food. Then he would chew it and swallow it. In this way Anni became his
mother, servant, and controller.
Anni's aggressive servitude, her striking combination of devotion and
force, could unite with Ayya's proclivity for creating bonds of pain
through self-and-other punishment, to create unimaginably complex
emotional equations, dramatically displayed before large audiences.
Anni told me the following story. Ayya told it to me independently
later. Their versions were surprisingly similar.
Shortly before the full moon of Cittirai, the most important festival day
of the year for this family, Ayya got another thorn in his foot. This one

210

/

Older Women and Younger Men

did not work its way out but became infected, and his foot became painfully swollen. On full-moon day, the swelling grew worse, and the foot
was too sore to walk on. By evening Ayya concluded that the pain was too
severe and distracting for him to conduct worship ceremonies for the
crowd of a hundred or so people who had come for this festival. He
therefore devised a treatment for himself. A solution of kerosene and salt
was to be heated to boiling, and a sharp knife heated to red-hot. Then the
knife was to be plunged into the kerosene solution and stabbed into his
foot, "where it hurt the most." All of Ayya's family and friends were
there, but none was willing to administer this drastic treatment to him,
except Anni. As she proceeded with the treatment, Ayya was trembling
with pain. His friends were weeping, and one of them cried, out, "Stop!
He doesn't need medicine." But Anni had continued until Ayya himself
directed her to quit.
Pain in the foot might have had a special meaning for Ayya. Anni told
me that when he was a small child, his mother punished him for eating
green rice by branding him three times across the foot with a red-hot iron.
Then, unable to bear the sight of her child suffering so, she wept. Ayya
remembered his mother as the very incarnation of love and patience, and
thought of her death as the greatest loss of his life, at the memory of which
he still sobbed uncontrollably. Now Anni was the one who punished out
of love, and Ayya said of her in passing, "Only Anni knows my mind."
VISHVANATHAN

". . . h e frees us as befits our hearts . . . "
Tirukkóvaiyár, 22.
Vishvanathan was a distant relative—Padmini's sister Lalita's husband's older brother's son—making Padmini his citti, "little mother," or
mother's younger sister. Being a poor relative, and young (in his early
twenties), Vishu was a quasi-servant. But he admired the big landowners,
and hoped to achieve wealth and status of his own someday. Even more
than owning land, he wanted to own and drive a bus or truck, for these
were valiant occupations, as well as lucrative ones. "You need courage to
drive a bus," he said, gazing into the distance. He wanted Ayya to buy
him one.
Vishu was to Padmini as Ayya was to Anni, but Padmini was less
roundabout and subtle in her management of Vishvanathan than Anni was
with Ayya. Whereas Anni and Ayya were equally matched, Padmini
dominated Vishvanathan absolutely.
She was always solicitous of his welfare. If he had to run an errand in
the rain, she would dress him up in a great rubber slicker. If there were

Older Women and Younger Men

/

211

Plate 29. Anni and Jnana Oli.
special items of food available, she made sure that he got some. When she
became supervisor of the rice mill, she had him stay there with her; their
two toothbrushes hung side by side on the wall there. When he lay down
to rest, she would put a pillow under his feet.
Ayya cast angry glances at Padmini when she did such things. Luxury
foods such as fruit should be reserved for children and guests, he said.
Padmini would answer, unperturbed, "Everyone should be served
equally."
But Padmini would also mercilessly tease Vishvanathan. So for instance one evening after dinner when Vishvanathan was there, Padmini
loudly asked me whether I wanted a banana like a grandfather or a banana
like Vishu. I said I didn't understand. Padmini said, "A banana like a

212

/

Older Women and Younger Men

grandfather is soft and squishy, but a banana like Vishu is firm and hard."
Poor Vishvanathan slunk shamefacedly away.
Often Padmini would scold Vishvanathan and beat him on the back, as
she did with the children and female servants. Vishvanathan would say
nothing. The other family members would be silent. When Vishvanathan
said that he wanted to leave this family, with which he had lived for six
years, Padmini told him that he could never survive on his own, that he
would certainly fail, that he was just like a little child. She was so angry
that she refused to serve him lunch.
Ayya told Padmini not to keep scolding over and over. He told Vishvanathan that he could take all the money he needed and go, but he should
not come back. (Later he told me that he was just saying this to make
Vishvanathan try harder to succeed.) Meanwhile Padmini was angrily
silent. Ayya told Padmini to give food to Vishvanathan. Padmini refused.
So I served him, then Mohana took over from me.
But Vishvanathan later said, of his various cittis, Padmini was the
best. Though she beat him, she fed him regularly and didn't make faces
while feeding him. When Padmini's sister Lalita served him, she would
make a face, and in her house he would only get two meals a day.
Vishvanathan had a mother's brother with a daughter of marriageable
age in whom Vishvanathan was interested, but the uncle would not marry
his daughter to Vishvanathan, because Vishvanathan was so poor. According to Vishvanathan, this uncle also was once very poor. He had only
a small patch of land that he worked. One day he climbed a power tower
and grabbed the wire in order to kill himself. He fell senseless to the
ground. Vishvanathan's father came and nursed him back to health. Then
he gave him a ring off his finger and told him to go and somehow live.
The uncle got a good job in a factory, and after that grew wealthier. But
he soon forgot his debt to Vishvanathan's father.
When Vishvanathan was still a child, his father died, and at that time,
Vishvanathan's father's brother, Lalita's husband, appropriated the land
that Vishvanathan's father had left. Vishvanathan sometimes spoke of
getting back the land that was rightfully his, and Padmini and the rest of
the family here encouraged him, though it would mean a break with Lalita
and her husband, and also physical separation from Padmini herself.
"If this household helps Vishvanathan too much," said Ayya, "—there
is a kind of talk in this country—Lalita's husband will speak wrongly
about us. He will say that we are opposing him, or helping Vishvanathan
oppose him just by assisting Vishvanathan. Still, we will help Vishvanathan. People in our household will not turn anyone away hungry."
One day Vishvanathan disappeared from the house without saying a
word to anyone. He was gone for several days. No one seemed worried.

Older Women and Younger Men

/

213

Plate 30. Vishvanathan.

Somehow they knew that he was going to his father's brother's house to
claim his land. When Vishvanathan returned, Padmini, angry with him
for leaving without saying anything, would not speak to him for a day.
She only spoke to him when he was leaving again that evening. This time
he was leaving "permanently." As they waited at the bus stop, both Padmini and Vishvanathan were weeping. "Why are you so angry with me
that you didn't speak with me for so long?" Vishvanathan asked. He was
obviously more hurt by her day of silence than by any of her beatings.
That day as she served Ayya lunch, Padmini had also been weeping.
She was worried about where Vishvanathan would eat. Her sister
wouldn't feed him properly; where he was staying he would get only two
meals a day; he had never cooked for himself; he needed strength to
cultivate his new farm (he had been given two acres, two bullocks, a
pump, and half a house site). Padmini begged Ayya to give Vishvanathan
money. Ayya refused and they quarreled bitterly. Padmini departed still

214

/

Older Women and Younger Men

weeping. After she left, Ayya commented, "It is the habit of everyone in
our household to give something in turn for service. But when Padmini
gives, she gives beyond limits. She wants everyone to be together; she
does not like separation. She will cry when you leave, too," he said (but
she didn't).
The next evening I asked Padmini if her mind had cooled from the
sorrow of parting with Vishvanathan. She said, no, it would take a few
days. "That shirt that we have seen a thousand times," she mused sadly.
(Vishvanathan had only one shirt. Its flashy pattern seemed as much a part
of him as his face.) What really made her sorrowful, she said, was the
way that when she beat him, he never fought back. She said he had no
courage (tunivu); he was like a child. She grieved at his going off into the
world like this, though she knew it would enable him to gain courage. He
had never cooked for himself before. Her sister's husband would not treat
him well.
My surprise at Padmini's sorrow was increased when I learned that
Vishvanathan's departure was not really permanent. He had said he
would return again in a few days, and in fact he did, and subsequently
spent more time at this house than in the village where his land was. And
Padmini continued to scold him and feed him as she always had.

CHAPTER SEVEN

The Lives of Children

Childhood is made much of in Tamil Nadu. People love to decorate their
walls with pictures of little babies, to worship child gods, to create literary
images of children in many different genres, and to play with children—
not, as with some of us, because they believe that the child requires this
kind of attention, but rather, it would seem, just because the adults themselves enjoy it.
But Tamil adults with whom I spoke said little to me about their own
childhoods, even when pressed. They said that they couldn't remember
those days long past. They also had little to say when I asked them how
they reared their own children. Questions such as, "What does a child
need most?" or "How do you raise a child?" or "What must a parent do for
a child?" or even, "How do you show love for a child?" were all interpreted materially. "Clothes, jewels, books, food"—these were the stock
answers that I got when I fished for discussions of the emotional needs of
children. To raise or grow a person (valarttal), I found out, meant above
all else to grow them materially. Adults would speak of patrons who
increased their wealth as the people who had "raised" them.
If you ask an American what a child needs most, the answer is likely
to be "love." Money, Americans will say, is not as important as love. But
when I asked Tamil women and men if you could give love without
giving money, their answer was an emphatic, "No!" On the surface of it,
this contrast is ironic, since in fact Americans give their children vastly
more of what can be bought with money that most Tamil parents are able
to give their children, while Tamil children are the recipients of much
more whole-hearted affection than American children usually get. My
hour-long interviews with relative strangers failed to capture the kinds of
realities that were taken for granted.
215

216

/

The Lives of Children

Personalities in Tamil Nadu are astonishingly diverse. Even within one
family there are great variations. For this and other reasons, I have not
attempted to do the kind of study that correlates features of childrearing
practices with properties of adult personalities. I have also not attempted
to do a developmental study—that is, to locate the minds of particular
children at some particular point on a scale of a social scientist's devising.
I have also not tested or probed the minds of the children I met. For the
most part, I have tried to be like a naturalist, observing my beings of
choice in the wild, trying not to scare them away.
In the descriptions and interpretations that follow, it will be seen that
I give at least as much attention to the actions of adults as to the actions
of children. What I am interested in are the meanings of particular events
both to the adults and to the children who participate in them—the meanings of interactions as total patterns. Since adults are much more powerful
than children, they have a much stronger hand in shaping interaction than
children do. I interpret adults as teaching through interactions and children as learning from them. Also, I interpret most of the teaching that I
see as more or less deliberate, though it is often hard to draw the line
between conscious and unconscious teaching. I do not posit, however,
any one-to-one correspondence between particular communicative acts
and particular meanings conveyed.
In my descriptions and interpretations of events involving children, I
try to take account of the fact that each child's personality is unique and
each child's experience of life is unique—though I know that many aspects of each child's experience are also experienced by other children in
India. What I am trying to do might be called a configurational study of
experience—I want to see how the different components of a particular
child's experience fit together into a pattern and lend meaning to one
another, whereas with another child, the same or similar components
might be parts of a different overall pattern and take on different meanings. So, for instance, children all over India get weaned in a sudden and
bitter fashion, but I believe that the meaning of the weaning experience
might differ greatly from child to child, according to the configuration of
meaningful experiences in which it is set (e.g., the presence or absence of
a younger sibling who is nursed after the older one is weaned, the quality
of other kinds of food available to the child, the characteristics of other
caretakers beside the mother, their relationship to the mother and to the
child, the personality of the mother, whether the child is male or female,
and a thousand other "variables"). It is also important to remember that
each child brings with it into the world a distinct set of cognitive and
emotional patterns and tendencies, which also must help to shape the
meaning-configurations that are formed in the child's mind. An emotion-

The Lives of Children

/

217

Plate 31. Annan with Jnana Oli and Sivamani.

ally volatile child and a "laid back" child, for instance, might process
similar experiences in quite different ways. Here again, all I am arguing
is that we should not attempt to homogenize the world, especially the
Indian one. We must consider ways in which this world proliferates variant dharmas and makes them fit together.
From the beginning of their lives, children in our Tamil household
were involved in complex enactments of love, but their involvement was
different from that of adults, since they were being taught the rules of
these performances, even while they were being used by certain adults to
send messages to others. The small child, who on the one hand was trying
to establish a sense of himself or herself as an entity, and on the other
hand was trying to be part of the life going on around him or her, learned
early the principles of theatrics—the disguising and blurring of true relations and identities, the sudden dramatic transitions from one emotional
extreme to the other, the multiple ironies. It seemed to me that behind all
these deceptions, illusions, and inversions, each child treasured a secret
identity, which he or she would mysteriously guard. How successful the
child was, both at theatrics and at guardianship of the self, depended

218

/

The Lives of Children

ultimately on what truth came through the drama—how hard or how
gentle were the beatings, how many the chances for secret kisses, how
much the milk that entered the belly.

J N A N A OLI

" . . . our child with his spear-bright eyes . . . "
Tirukkovaiyar, 339.
Jnana Oli was the child of Padmini and Ayya, their third and last child,
their only son. At two he was a sensualist, and he was proud. When I
picked him up he would lie in my arms arching his back and throwing
back his head, his eyes half-closed, his lips half-parted in a dreamy smile.
When I offered him a biscuit he refused it with a wave of his hand. From
the beginning of our acquaintance he let me bathe him, and he let me
carry him when he felt he needed to be carried, but all the time that I was
there he never accepted the food that I offered. Sometimes when I called
him he would turn and walk away. Sometimes, unbidden, he would take
my hand.
Often, the smiling women of the household would ask Jnana Oli to
perform. "Do a dance," they would say, and Jnana Oli would dance,
stamping his feet up and down and wiggling his small body, amid a wide
circle of admirers. "How does grandmother walk?" the women would
ask. Jnana Oli would bend forty-five degrees at the waist, put his hand in
the small of his back, and hobble around in a circle. "Say 'Salutations!'"
He would fold his hands and speak the word. "Ask, 'Have you eaten?'"
He would ask. He knew many words for a two-year-old, and he had a
wide repertoire of body language.
The older children did not often carry Jnana Oli or play with him the
way street children did with small brothers and sisters. All of Jnana Oli's
caretakers were adults, and there were many of them: his own mother
Padmini, his mother's sister Anni, her husband Annan, his own father
Ayya, his mother's brother's wife Mohana, his mother's father's sister
Attai, his cousins Vishvanathan and Ram Tilakam, the servant Modday.
Anni delighted in having Jnana Oli list his caretakers in rank order, from
most favorite to least. Sometimes Jnana Oli's mother was in first place,
sometimes the head of the household, Annan. All of these caretakers
adored Jnana Oli. All of them together had given him the pet name
Olikanna, "Oli darling," and it had stuck and become his regular name.
Yet, but for their use of this name, all of the caretakers expressed their

The Lives of Children

/

219

admiration in markedly different ways. He was like a little magnet that
they formed a pattern around, each part of the pattern unique, yet the
whole symmetrical. His personality incorporated this pattern.
Anni was Jnana Oli's most subtle teacher. Sometimes she would sit in
the afternoon with Jnana Oli on her lap, one hand cradling his head, the
other cupped over his penis, talking with him. When he said something
charming she would squeeze his penis gently, as one would squeeze a
Mend's hand, in a sudden small burst of affection. Oli, when he napped,
lay face up with his hands folded in the same easy way over the same
tender place, sheltering it in his sleep.
Anni's lessons had many meanings, and they involved a large component of benevolent deceit. For instance, when she asked Oli to rank his
caretakers, she taught him that he had some control over his social world,
inasmuch as it mattered whom he loved most, and he was free to dispense
his love at will. But in truth he was very little in control of the social
organization of the household, and the hidden lesson of the ranking game
was that, just as he had the power to assign a value to others, his value
was a function of other people's need to be valued by him. He was good,
and even superior, because others sought his love, but without them,
where would he be? As in the matter of the trusteeship of the penis,
self-containment was sometimes just an image of containment in others.
Relationships, whether of enmity or of love, shifted, and were transformed into their own opposites, as bitter turns into sweet and sweet into
rotten in the course of things ripening. One could not take it for granted
that a feeling was as it had been. So relationships and feelings had periodically to be reexamined and renamed. Anni told me that children had a
custom. One child would say to another, "Green fruit or ripe fruit [kayà
paramà]?" making a fist with the index finger and pinky extended for kày,
"green fruit," and only the pinky extended for pararti, "ripe fruit." When
there was a fight between people, they were separate, like forefinger and
pinky, and the relationship between them was hard and sour, like a green
fruit. But when they were friends, they were one, like the single pinky;
their relationship was sweet, and whatever passed between them would
go down easily:
One day, Jnana Oli announced to Anni that Padmini had hit him. "Are
you kày with your mother?" asked Anni.
"I am not kày," said Jnana Oli.

220

/

The Lives of Children

Anni said, "Will you make what your mother said kay to you [amma
conna peccai kaya viduvaya]?"
"I will not leave mother kay [nan amma kay vida madden]," said
Jnana Oli.
Anni said to me later that what Jnana Oli was trying to say was, "I will
not abandon mother [nan ammavai kay vida madden]." (The word kay
with a long a means "green fruit." The word kay with a short a means
"hand." Kay vidu is to take one's hand away, leave off, let go of, abandon.)
Thus Jnana Oli was tricked by Anni, for in the act of proudly saying no
and making the manly proclamation, "I will not abandon mother," he
relinquished his pride and forgave his mother, agreeing that what she had
said to him, even in anger, he would swallow as though it were a ripe
fruit.
Often it was obvious that Anni did not mean what she said, as when
she picked up a thorny stick and said smilingly to Jnana Oli, "May I prick
you with a thorn?" He laughed as she lightly touched him with it. Such
loving threats of violence were many. With Anni they gradually faded
into actual punishments for actual misdeeds. When Jnana Oli had a temper tantrum, she took a large stick and tapped him on the bottom, then
banged the stick loudly on the floor, then picked him up and comforted
him. He seemed barely to notice the stick. Ultimately, Anni's "punishments" of Jnana Oli never went beyond threats, yet she triumphed over
him, not because she provoked fear in him but because she was so skillful
in the creation of double messages that through them she could maneuver
him in any direction she chose. The resolution of her debates with him
could often be taken in more than one way, so that both Jnana Oli's pride
in himself and sense of dependence upon her might be enhanced during
a single interchange:
When Jnana Oli picked up a stick and made a threatening gesture with
it, of a kind that adults habitually made toward him, Anni observed
him and said, "Naughty. Say naughty, mother. [Tappu. Tappumma
ceppu.]"
Jnana Oli was silent. Anni picked up the stick, and with the same
threatening gesture that Oli had made, repeated her command. Oli still
refused, standing defiantly with his hand on his hip. Anni whipped his
hip with the stick then instantly swept him onto her lap and cuddled
him, saying in affectionate mock-anger, "So you put your hand on
your hip (kay idupile poddiye)." Then she said, "Who hit you? Did
Arivaraci hit you?"

The Lives of Children

/

221

Jnana Oli muttered something like "manamana-manamana," poutingly. His sister Arivaraci, sitting nearby, interpreted what he said,
"You did it yourself. [Niye ceiice.]"
Jnana Oli climbed down from Anni's lap. Anni picked up the
stick and brandished it, above him, commanding, "Say, 'Naughty,
mother."' Jnana Oli began to cry fearfully. Anni picked him up
and cuddled him, then sat down with him in her lap. She said, "If you
don't say, 'Naughty, mother,' I will go away. Shall I go?"
Jnana Oli said, "Go."
Anni said, "Where shall I go?"
Jnana Oli said, "Go to the house."
Anni said, "I'll go to the house if you don't say, 'Naughty.' "
Meanwhile, Oli's father on the sidelines was commenting to me that
Oli was right to refuse, and that Oli in his stubbornness was just like
himself (the father).
Anni repeated her threat. "I'll go the house. Say, 'Naughty.' "
Finally, Jnana Oli said, "Naughty, mother. [Tappumma.]"
Subsequently, Jnana Oli hit his two-year-old cousin Sivamani with the
same stick and knocked him down. Sivamani wept. Anni asked what
happened. Arivaraci said, "Jnana Oli knocked Sivamani down and after
that they began to fight." Anni said nothing but returned to her conversation with Jnana Oli's father.
The order "Tappumma ceppu [Say naughty, mother]," that Anni gave
Jnana Oli was elliptic and vague. By itself, the term "tappu" is mild. It is
often glossed in English as "mistake" because it suggests an absence of
malevolence on the part of the wrongdoer. The appended "-mma" can
mean many things. As applied by people like Jnana Oli to people like
Anni, it is an expression of dependence, a plea for love, a cry of fear and
longing. As applied by people like Anni to people like Jnana Oli, "-mma"
is a casual, affectionate term of address. When Jnana Oli repeated "Tappumma [Naughty, mother]," to Anni, he might have been accepting her
indictment of him, or he might have been handing it back to her. As the
statement was phrased, both possibilities were left open.
The ambiguity of Anni's message to Jnani Oli was compounded by her
act of brandishing the stick at him to make him repent of the act of
brandishing the stick, and the act of turning a whipping suddenly into a
cuddling. Thus Jnana Oli learned a flip-flop lesson: brandishing the stick
is half wrong and half right, wrong on one side but right on the other.
Context and relations entirely determine the moral significance of the act.
Beating was not wrong in itself, nor was weeping a sign only of sor-

222

/

The Lives of Children

row. Sorrow was only the proximal meaning of tears, but they had distal
meanings, and distal meanings beyond those. So Attai sang a lullaby for
me, that she had sung to all the children she had raised:
Lullaby, lullaby, who hit you and made you cry?
Water trembles in your weeping eye.
Lullaby, lullaby, the river will be high,
The elephant will rise from its bath.
The pond will be high,
The horse will rise from its bath, lullaby, lullaby.
araro, arariro, yar adiccu nl arutay?
Anitu kannu nir talumpum.
Araro, arariro, aru nirampirukkum,
Anai kuliccerum.
Kulam nirampirukkum,
Kutirai kuliccerum, araro, arariro.
Many Tamil lullabies ask the same question, "Who beat you and made
you cry?" There must have been a beating, it is implied, for there to be a
weeping. And in this lullaby, still more is said: on the far side of the
weeping, someone will find joy.
Jnana Oli's mother, Padmini, was more volatile than the calm and
philosophical Anni. She could lose her temper in a flash, unexpectedly.
When Jnana Oli accidently knocked over a pot of sambar, Padmini
grabbed him under one arm, carried him into the next room, and beat him
for five minutes while he screamed. (Later she told me that she had to beat
him because the hot sambar might have burnt him and he had to learn to
be more careful.) Her expressions of affection, like the ventings of her
anger, were private and intense. I found her sometimes alone with Jnana
Oli in the back room of the house, kissing him and caressing him. She
would stop when she saw me, as though I had caught her doing something
wrong.
Indeed there was a sense that the love between mother and son could
grow too strong. Hence Mohana and Padmini often took over care of each
other's sons when they were together in the same household, and Mohana
was allowed to joke with Jnana Oli in a way that was forbidden to Padmini:
Like most small boys, Jnana Oli had only one shirt for a garment. One
day it tore and he took it to his aunt (attai) Mohana to mend. Mohana
told him that she would only mend it for him if he would marry her.
Oli, to whom Mohana had often proposed marriage, but who had

The Lives of Children

/

223

always refused until now, solemnly agreed, and Mohana took his shirt
and mended it.
When I (always addressed by the children as Peggymma, the way
Anni was called Annimma and Padmini Pappimma) tried to join in this
game, asking Jnana Oli not to marry Mohana but to marry me, Anni
turned to me with great seriousness and told me that a woman in the
category of mother should never propose marriage to a child.
Jnana Oli was weaned at the age of one year, as were all of the children
in his household, by bitter neem juice being rubbed on his mother's
breasts. Now, at the age of two he received cow milk, one cup in the
morning and one cup in the evening, and the degree of anxiety he showed
with respect to the cup of milk was surprising, considering his composure
in other situations. In the evening, when he saw the cup of milk coming,
he would cry in fear, but he drank the milk without a struggle. In the
morning, he accepted the cup of milk willingly but cried when they temporarily took it away to wipe his mouth. With this vital food alone he had
no choice; making sure he drank his milk, and drank it all, was a matter
of deadly seriousness to the women of the household. Milk was very
expensive, and it was the only source of concentrated protein that Saivas
allowed themselves (indeed, caivam in Tamil means "vegetarian" more
than it means allegiance to a particular god). The older children and adults
in this family did not get milk at all but had occasional helpings of diluted
buttermilk or, much more frequently, went without. For any child, the
experience of sweet mother's milk given on demand suddenly followed
by such a bitter weaning must have imbued the idea of motherhood with
contrasting meanings. After this, the daily forced feeding and forced
withdrawal of cow's milk by any of several mothers could only have
strengthened a sense that duality was an essential attribute of love.
Like her sister Anni, Padmini taught Jnana Oli the value of closeness
to others by threatening to withdraw this closeness. And conversely, Oli
learned that he could elicit interaction by stubbornly withdrawing himself. But Padmini pushed this game further than Anni and introduced the
element of jealousy, more painful than a thorn:
Jnana Oli had been throwing daily temper tantrums. People responded
by carrying him from one place to another and offering him playthings, but daily he became more difficult to satisfy. After one such
bout, his mother embraced his cousin Umapathi and said, "Umapathi
is my darling; you are not my darling." Jnana Oli angrily stalked away
and refused to talk to anyone for one and a half hours. When he
returned, he found his mother again lying by Umapathi's side. He

224

/

The Lives of Children

turned on his heel, went back to the side room, and refused to speak to
anyone for the rest of the afternoon—about three hours. His aunts
Mohana and Anni tried to get him out of his pout, but no matter how
they called him, he would not budge. They talked about this episode
later with delight, especially marveling at his perseverance, that he
could maintain a pout for so long.
In contrast to the women, Annan handled his nephew Jnana Oli in a
more or less straightforward, consistently kindly manner that was neither
playful nor combative. My strong impression was that he was intentionally trying to teach Jnana Oli, through his own example, to be patient,
gentle, and unselfish. But, unfortunately, the more patience Annan
showed, the more impatient Jnana Oli became.
In the middle of the night, when Umapathi awoke and had to urinate,
his father Annan was the one he called to go with him, and Annan went.
When Jnana Oli also woke and cried, Annan tried to comfort him as well,
rocking his hammock, telling him to chant namacivaya ("the name of
Siva," a mantra). I asked Anni in the morning if Annan had done this for
all the children when they were small. Anni said yes. When Anuradha
and Ayya's sister's daughter were babies he used to carry one in each arm
and sleep on his stomach with one arm over each.
Often Annan would twin Jnana Oli and his age mate Sivamani, one on
each side of his body, as Anni said he had done with the girl children.
Seating one little boy on each knee, so that they faced each other, he
would play with them. Or after they bathed he would pat them both dry
at once, nuzzling them both gently with his chin.
But during the months when I was in the household, I saw that Jnana
Oli demanded increasingly more of Annan's attention, and the less
aggressive Sivamani had to content himself with other diversions, such as
playing with the servant's daughter Ponni, whom Jnana Oli ignored. By
this time, Annan had superseded even Padmini in Jnana Oli's ranking of
favorites.
The situation soon got out of hand. Annan was in the habit of bringing
home toys and biscuits to be shared among the children, but particularly
desirable objects were monopolized by Jnana Oli. So it was with a set of
plastic blocks that were introduced into the household: they became the
focus of day-to-day ranking games. The servant's child Ponni could not
even touch the blocks. Annan built a truck out of them and tried to get
Jnana Oli and Sivamani to play with it together, but somehow Jnana Oli
ended up having it all to himself. Earlier, when the older children had
played with the blocks, Arivaraci had cleaned them up. Now Jnana Oli
dumped them out of their box, howled, and summoned the beleaguered

The Lives of Children

/

225

Vishvanathan to put them back. "Vicannà, vàri pòdi," he said, "Brother
Vishu, scoop them back." Vishvanathan complied.
Annan, the village accountant, was on the front porch discussing some
important piece of business with a group of men. Jnana Oli came out onto
the porch crying, telling Annan to come and build a toy truck for him.
Annan went inside, built the truck, and came back out. Jnana Oli followed him. One of the men gave Jnana Oli some biscuits. Another proceeded to make a building for him out of the plastic blocks. Mohana came
out on the porch and carried the protesting Jnana Oli back into the kitchen. Jnana Oli soon reappeared on the porch. This happened several times.
Annan tried to humor Jnana Oli, carrying him around, giving him more
biscuits. Before long, the men on the porch were gone. Annan rocked
Jnana Oli to sleep in his hammock. While Jnana Oli slept, Annan sat on
the front porch chanting Saiva hymns in his hoarse tenor. When I looked
again, Annan was asleep on the floor inside while Jnana Oli swayed
sleeping in the hammock above him.
Attai commented to me that Jnana Oli often had fits of stubbornness
(pidivàtam). People had to carry him around, but no matter what they
gave him, he was not satisfied. She said that his father also had fits of
stubbornness. Sometimes he refused to eat for ten or twelve days.
"Why?" I asked. "Because people will not do what he says," she answered. I asked Ayya if this was true. He said yes. If people would not do
what he said, then what he said must have been wrong. Then he had to
punish himself because it would not be right to expect others to punish
him, he explained.
Though Jnana Oli had not yet achieved such skillful and refined expressions of stubbornness, all of the people in the house agreed that he
was following in his father's footsteps. Ayya noted proudly that Jnana Oli
was reaching the point where he knew no fear. He was developing the
spirit of resistance (etirppu unarcci). If someone hit him, he would hit
back. He would even hit his own mother, Ayya said.
Proud though he was of his only son, Ayya was little involved in the
everyday care of Jnana Oli, and Jnana Oli at this stage showed little overt
interest in him. They did not avoid each other, but neither did either go
out of his way to be with the other. It is doubtful, however, that Ayya's
backstage comments about Jnana Oli's fighting spirit were lost on Jnana
Oli.
If we are to believe what Ayya said about his relationship with his own
father, this "spirit of resistance" was something that Ayya, in his turn,
received from above. His father had a reputation for violence and was
feared by all, said Ayya. Moreover, he was born under an evil star.

226

/

The Lives of Children

Consequently it was very difficult for him to find a wife and he ended up
marrying a woman of a different division of Reddiars, a marriage that in
those days was against caste rules.
The father and the son failed to see eye-to-eye on many matters. The
father smoked tobacco and ate meat, two customs the son abhorred, and
Ayya claimed that he often said to his father, "All of the bad things that
you do, I will not do. The family will not fall because of me. It will be a
great family."
Ayya said that he studied against his father's will and worked hard to
build up a collection of books, which his father burned. His father tortured him by binding him to a stake, whipping him, and leaving him to
stand in the sun. According to Ayya, his father fought against injustice
but was not himself unjust. "But he did unjust things to you," I said. "He
did those things out of ignorance," answered Ayya, "not knowing that
they were wrong."
His father's aim, said Ayya, was to raise his children to be good—not
to steal, not to lie. "Like myself, he was a loving person, but he did not
show his love externally. He always spoke to us as though he were
angry."
After Ayya's mother died, his father sat in one spot for four days,
weeping. "If he had had no love, would he have wept like that?" Ayya
asked. Subsequently, the father was more gentle with his children. He
bathed them himself and fanned them on hot nights. As he lay dying, his
last words to Ayya were, "Be careful."
Ayya bore little resemblance to the father he described. As I have
mentioned earlier, he attributed to himself, and others attributed to him,
many "feminine" qualities. But he admitted to having beaten Padmini in
the past, "to punish her for having beaten the children." Of this past habit,
he repented. The temper remained. He himself had little patience with
children, including his own; occasionally he would smack them for the
smallest of trespasses, such as putting a hand in his way when he was
sewing. For slightly greater errors, the punishments he meted out might
be more severe. According to Anni, two years previously the children had
stolen a broken padlock and traded it for ice cream. Ayya punished them
by beating them on the backs of their hands with a stick and making them
keep their hands outstretched while he did this.
In connection with such punishments, Anni stated that both Jnana Oli
and Umapathi had a "good habit." If you told them to shut their mouths,
they would shut them and keep them shut, even if you beat them until it
hurt. None of their sisters could do this.
Thus, Jnana Oli had in Anni, Padmini, Annan, and Ayya four very

The Lives of Children

/

227

different kinds of parents. But in his dealings with each of them he might
have discovered, repeated in so many different ways, a similar message:
that love, the giving of self, and pride, the containment of self, are both
desirable, and each is inseparable from the other. With Anni, acts of
autonomy and dependence, defiance and acceptance, might be elicited,
encouraged, or rewarded by a single word or gesture smoothly merging
opposites: "Naughty, mother [tappumma]," or "I will not abandon / will
not leave as a green fruit [kayvidamadden]," or the arm that in one sweep
both whipped him and lifted him into the comforting lap. Anni taught
contextual variation of the meaning of an act such as the wielding of a
stick, so that the child holding the stick and standing on the boundary
between a context in which its use was forbidden (an adult whom he was
not allowed to beat) and a context in which its use was permitted (a child
whom he was allowed to beat) might experience himself as the space in
which a thing became its opposite.
Visual and verbal puns, contrasts, and grammatical ambiguities
abounded in Anni's dialogues with Jnana Oli. Her play with him delighted in hidden meanings: love hidden beneath anger hidden beneath
love, so that it became impossible to know which was the real and which
the mock emotion. The transition between the extremes of reward and
punishment was so gradual that the boundary dividing them, if it existed
at all, was imperceptible.
With Padmini, intense anger and intense affection appeared in sharp
and sudden contrast to their surroundings, upon the same face; and jealousy was aroused, the contradictory experience in which both anger and
love are provoked, collide, and merge. Jnana Oli's response to his feeling
of jealousy, withdrawal from interaction as a way of provoking interaction, was similar to his response to Annan's devotion.
Annan's relentlessly patient affection compelled Jnana Oli to oppose
him; the more Annan placated him, the more Jnana Oli demanded placation. By complementation he became the opposite of this man, his "distant father," who was in fact so loving, intimate, and humble. And his
own father, encouraging his defiance from a distance, guided Jnana Oli to
be, like himself, both defiant and distant. Hence the son who rebelled
against the punishing father could end by honoring this father with the
highest kind of love: the mirroring of the father's own spirit. For such a
son, acceptance of punishment—refusing to flinch while being beaten—
was a matter of pride, as well as of love. Later Jnana Oli might learn, as
his father had learned, to punish himself as a way of punishing others. To
internalize the punisher was to throw his punishment back at him, simultaneously becoming and returning the image.
Another kind of mirroring was taught by Padmini and Annan together,

228

/

The Lives of Children

who often treated Sivamani, Jnana Oli's agemate, as though he were
Jnana Oli's double—Annan by physically pairing the two boys on the left
and right sides of his body; Padmini (with Mohana) by exchanging them.
Jnana Oli at the age of two had great autonomy. He could take or leave
any person he pleased, he could break rules, he could make new meanings. Within the walls of the compound, amid so many people, he was
completely mobile and yet completely constrained, never alone vyith himself but always engaged with someone. Like an electron running through
a crystal, he was always part of somebody's orbital. Never was the nature
of the matrix in which he moved more evident than at mealtime. One
morning I made the following notes:
The women were eating their morning meal, seated in a
circle on the floor. Jnana Oli sat at Padmini's left, with his
legs crossed. He went to Attai, then to Anni. He sat in
Anni's lap. Anni tried to feed him an idli, but he refused.
He went to Attai's lap, then back to Anni's lap. Anni began
to feed him rice and sambar.
Sivamani was sitting to Padmini's right. Padmini gave
him some food on a plate. He fed himself. Anni fed Jnana
Oli a drumstick [a vegetable]. He refused the second one.
She went back to feeding him rice.
Padmini tried to feed Sivamani but he refused. She put
the food into Jnana Oli's mouth instead. Attai put a ladleful
of sambar on Sivamani's plate. Jnana Oli got up and picked
up the pot of buttermilk. Padmini held the pot while Jnana
Oli drank from it. Jnana Oli came over to me. He leaned
against the door to the central room. He was holding in his
hands a small shred of plastic, which he was holding while
people fed him. While Sivamani fed himself, Jnana Oli,
exactly the same age as Sivamani, never touched the food
he ate with his own hands. The servant Ram Tilakapi passing through the doorstep pinched Jnana Oli's cheeks. He
sat by himself in the doorstep talking to no one in particular.
Anni, having finished eating, arose and walked toward
the courtyard. Jnana Oli followed her. He stood in the
doorway to the courtyard. Anni returned with an armful of
dirty dishes. Jnana Oli sauntered back to the circle of
women still eating and stood there. He went to Anuradha
and put his hand on her shoulder but received no response.
He went to Mohana and put his hand on her shoulder. No
response.
Sivamani arose. Ram Tilakam took him by the wrist and
led him to the wash place. She poured water over his hand.

The Lives of Children

/

229

Padmini fed him buttermilk out of the pot. Sivamani commenced playing with the dirty pots. Anni took them and
stacked them. Ram Tilakam wiped his face.
Anni told Jnana Oli and Sivamani to go to the main
room. The two of them went there, Jnana Oli in the lead.
Anni put them both in their hammocks and swung them.
They were sitting up in the hammocks; neither seemed
ready to sleep. Anni lay them on their backs and continued
to swing them.
Mohana came up, slapped Jnana Oli hard on his bottom
through the hammock, and gave the hammock a hard
swing. Jnana Oli whimpered, "Sourpuss [tnunci]." Mohana gave Sivamani a swing, then stopped the hammock
and leaned over to whisper to him.
Jnana Oli said to Anni, "Aunt Mohana pinched [Mohanattai kilicci\." Sivamani said, "Mother pinched [Amma
kilicci]."
Jnana Oli and Sivamani remained awake. Anni was reclining on her belly on the floor talking to me. Sivamani
climbed down from his hammock and lay between her legs
with his head on her bottom as a pillow. Jnana Oli watched
from his hammock as Padmini played with my son. He
climbed down from his hammock and lay with his head on
a pillow near Mohana. Padmini lay down with him and
cuddled him. She told me to write in my notebook that she
was cuddling Sivamani.
Jnana Oli had a plurality of mothers. Many laps cradled him, many
hands fed him. He slipped without friction in and out among them as
though they were all interchangeable. And they themselves aimed to be
equally loving toward him and all the other children of the house, though
of course this ideal could not be realized to perfection. Thus his own
mother was embarrassed to be caught cuddling him and called him by his
cousin's name. This was the plurality of love—his own mother, hidden
among many duplicates, himself duplicated in others, a matrix of mirrors
that had a certain magic, enabling as it did this small boy to live his life
both very bound and very free.
SIVAMANI

" . . . having found such a friend . . . "
Tirukkovaiyar, 19.
At two, Sivamani would have seemed healthy, except for his puffy
eyes and swollen belly. He dimpled when he smiled. He could dance like

230

/

The Lives of Children

Plate 32. Jnana Oli.

Jnana Oli. In this household, Sivamani was so mixed with Jnana Oli, and
with Jnana Oli's siblings, that he got in the habit of calling his mother
Mohanattai, "Aunt Mohana," while he was there, because all the other
children called her that. He was one with his cousins, he was outnumbered by them, he was their shadow (they were not his).
He differed from them, and in particular from Jnana Oli, because he
did not belong entirely to this household. Together with his mother, he
had to spend at least half of every year in her mother-in-law's house,
where he was the only child and there was no one else to play with.
During much of this time, Mohana was kept occupied tending the fields
of groundnuts that belonged to her mother-in-law, and Sivamani was left

The Lives of Children

/

231

to his own devices. The village was much more remote from the city than
the village of his cousins, smaller and vastly quieter. The altitude was
higher and the weather chillier. During the rainy season, several rooms of
the house would be an inch deep in water. Moreover, the food in this
house was different. In Sivamani's cousins' house, there were milk and
ghee. In his grandmother's house, there were neither. Mohana laughed at
the memory of him asking his grandmother for ghee. He had become
accustomed to too much luxury, she said.
One day, after Mohana and Sivamani had been staying at the home of
Anni and Padmini for some months, Anni returned with them to the home
of Anni's parents, Mohana's in-laws. I went too. It was a day-long trip,
by bus and oxcart. When we arrived at the house in the late afternoon,
Sivamani was very grouchy, frequently crying, and he grew grouchier as
the evening wore on. He wanted to eat a banana and was refused it, and
he cried at that. He wanted to play with the water in a bucket and was not
allowed to, and he cried at that.
At about seven in the evening the family sat down to eat. Sivamani,
standing apart, looked around at the dark walls of the room they were in,
the shadows flickering from the lantern, and suddenly burst into a wail.
Anni said to Sivamani, "Go out and get Anuradha and Jnana Oli [whom
we had left far away in the other village] and tell them to come and eat."
I told Anni I thought that probably Sivamani was crying because he
missed his friends back at the other house. Anni agreed. Sivamani went
out into the hall as Anni had directed, looked around, then realizing that
he had been tricked, wailed even louder than before. Anni picked him up
and carried him out to the front porch to comfort him. Mohana laughed
uproariously.
Thus Sivamani was taught what Jnana Oli was taught, to value others
by considering their absence. But whereas Jnana Oli was taught by means
of threats that were never carried out, Sivamani was taught through unrealized promises. Jnana Oli thought that he was in control of his world,
especially of other people's comings and goings and of his own. But
Sivamani could have entertained no such illusions. Jnana Oli swam at will
through the fluid but stable medium of his family. Sivamani had to spend
much of his life with no such medium to swim through. His grandparents,
like his father, cared little for him. Subsequently, in their household, his
mother would attempt suicide. She (and Sivamani?) had gone for days
without eating, and her parents-in-law had not even noticed, she said.
When Sivamani was living again with his cousins, a dramatic thing
happened. Padmini and Mohana went with their children to a festival, and
somehow Sivamani got lost in the crowd. "We gave Sivamani to a little

232

/

The Lives of Children

boy from the village to carry," said Padmini, "and when we looked, he
was gone. Mohana and I searched everywhere for him. We were weeping. Sivamani would be hungry and that little boy wouldn't know what to
do. After two hours, we found him in a choultry [a shelter for pilgrims]
near the temple." Lost in a crowd of strangers for two hours Sivamani had
been terrified. Would Jnana Oli have been entrusted this way, in a festival
crowd, at night, to the arms of a half-known child? What might it mean,
to be allowed to fall out of the nest?
Perhaps Sivamani would forget this incident. Still, there were daily
small reminders to him of his medial position—in but not in, equal to
Jnana Oli, but then, at crucial moments, not. People would treat Jnana Oli
and Sivamani with similar rough affection. Oli they would strike or
pinch. Siva they would knock over. Jnana Oli would be angry and would
strike back when he was struck. Sivamani could not push an adult down.
When he was pushed over, he would laugh, as his mother laughed. For
in effect, he had inherited his mother's status—a status determined as
much by affect as by structural position. Sivamani's mother Mohana was
married to Jnana Oli's mother's brother Tambu. Following the same
pattern, when the children grew up, Jnana Oli might marry Sivamani's
younger sister. Indeed when Sivamani was four he did get a younger
sister, who was better cared for than Sivamani himself had been in his
toddlerhood. Perhaps this was because when the little girl Minakshi was
born, her mother had broken with her parents-in-law and become permanently a member of her cousins' household, where wealth was increasing
and life in general was better. Perhaps Minakshi was well cared for because she was the last child of her generation bom in that household,
everybody's baby. Or perhaps she was favored because there were
thoughts that she might someday become Jnana Oli's wife. If this happened, Jnana Oli would become a "wife-taker" with respect to Sivamani,
and a cut above him structurally as he already was emotionally. As life
shook down now, when the boys were just two, Sivamani's role with
respect to Jnana Oli was that of beloved sidekick, eternal second fiddle.
Thus, matched though he was by the adults with his affine Jnana Oli,
Sivamani was distraught when the servant Modday disappeared with her
ragged and hungry little daughter Ponni. "For Ponni was Siva's best
friend," said Mohana. "He loved to dance with her."
One evening after dinner, Mohana swept Sivamani onto her lap. Sivamani took her face into his small hands and kissed her on both cheeks and
on the chin. I told Mohana that I thought Sivamani was not looking very
healthy. Mohana said that his belly had gotten very big but his arms and
legs were like matchsticks. She was smiling, but it seemed to me that she

The Lives of Children

/

233

was worried. When the children sat down to eat, Mohana fed all the other
children while Sivamani, hungry, whimpered but said nothing. Finally
Anuradha served Sivamani. After Sivamani had finished eating, he got
up. Padmini thwacked him on the back in her usual affectionate way.
Sivamani lurched forward, then fell backward. Mohana laughed out loud.
"He's like a little truck with a heavy load," she said, "a big heavy load up
front." She laughed until the tears rolled down her cheeks.
ARIVARACI
". . . something broke this girl. . ."
Tirukkovaiyar, 6.
Arivaraci was Padmini's oldest child. She was born three days before
Mankaiyarkkaraci, Anni's second child. The two girls were often addressed or referred to jointly as Arivumankai (Jnana Oli and Sivamani
were also paired in this way, as Olisiva). Since Arivu was bom first, she
was nicknamed Petti, "the big girl," while Mankai was called Cinni, "the
little girl." There was, however, no difference in size or status between
the two girls as far as I could see. Mankai was the more aggressive of the
two. Arivaraci's formal name meant "Queen of Knowledge." Mankaiyarkkaraci's formal name meant "Queen of Women." The latter was
the name of a heroic queen of long ago, who through her bravery saved
an army. Arivaraci's name was unique, coined by her father.
"Shortly after Mankaiyarkkaraci was born," said Ayya, he wrote a
song. He did not directly say that he wrote it for his own infant daughter,
his first child. Perhaps he wrote it for both of the baby girls:
Smiling flower! Ripe fruit!
Gift-giving smell! Sweet taste!
Substance of the open secret!
Image of abundant grace! Golden light!
Cool moon coming with the south wind!
Song-flower growing in the sweet tongue!
Holy grace dancing in the meeting ground!
Star light resting in our hearts!
Sweet sound harvested in music!
High secret blossoming in the ancient tongue!
Great treasure born from the soil!
Light-giving holy lamp bonded to the family honor!
Good smell wafting from a flower!
Lovely jewel ripened in a raindrop!
Great yield reaped from the land!

Plate 33.

Sivamani.

The Lives of Children

/

235

Gem of grace sprouting out of goodness!
Light of grace dawning from silence!
Body of wisdom! God food!
Vine of the family, born
In the friendship of souls!
Cirikkum malare! Ceruhkaniye!
Cirtaru maname! Tincuvaiye!
Virinta maraiyin niraiporule!—Arul
Valattin polive! Ponoliye!
Tenralil vanta kulirnilave!—Tin
Tamiril erunta pamalare!
Manril adum tiruvarule!—Ehkal
Manatil amarnta cudarvilakke!
Pannil vilainta innicaiye!—Paran
Tamiril malarnta mamaraiye!
Mannil piranta perunitiye!
Manpura olividum tiruvilakke!
Malaril manakkum narumaname!—Marai
Muttil mutirnta erilmaniye!
Nilattil vilainta perumpayane!—Mana
Nalattil ilaitta arulmaniye!
Monattil utitta arul oliye!—Van
Mekattil utirnta maraiyamute!
Nanattin vadive! Nallamute! Uyir
Nadpil piranta kulakkodiye!
Such had been Ayya's dreams of a daughter.
Arivaraci was different from the other children in the family. They
were saucy and daring. She strove to be good. She would sweep the
house, scrub the dishes, run errands for her parents. While the other
children were playing, she would stand apart, or she would join them for
a while and then leave them early to go home. In the early morning, while
the other children slept, Arivu would be up, helping the servants fetch the
water. She was the one who performed the daily worship ceremony to
Ganesan. Under her breath, she would curse herself for tiny mistakes.
Except for Jnana Oli, all of the children in this family were thin and
often ill, but Arivu was the thinnest and was sick the most. Whenever she
traveled with her family to a festival or marriage or to visit friends, she
would get a fever. She would get pains all over her body but especially in
her legs and feet. Sometimes she would lie down in the evening crying.
In a manner characteristic of all the children in the household, if someone
asked her why she wept she would just keep weeping, without giving an
answer. Others would answer for her, or no answer would be needed.

236

/

The Lives of Children

When she wept like this, her grandmother Attai would take her feet in her
lap and rub them.
In the morning before school the children would all recite their lessons.
At the end of each lesson in the schoolbook, there would be questions.
Padmini would read a question and the child would chant the answer in a
monotone. The child was required to repeat the text word-for-word.
Arivu would often stumble. When she did, Padmini would taunt her and
beat her on the face until she wept. This was hard for me to watch. I asked
Ayya why Padmini punished Arivu so. Ayya said that Padmini wanted
Arivu to be a great scholar, and this was her way of accomplishing it.
Anni said that of all the children, Arivaraci had received the most
beatings. "Why?" I asked. "Fear," said Anni. Padmini beat Arivu to
make her study, said Ayya, and this made her fear school and fear that the
teachers would beat her, too. When she saw the teacher, who was a big
man, said Anni, she was afraid to go to school, and every day she had to
be beaten. She was so terrified that they had to drag her there, and then
she would run away. Now she was terrified of being late. Arivu did not
study as well as Mangai, said Anni. She was just not as smart.
Sometimes, when she was little, Arivu would get a fever and they
would take her to the doctor. When they said the word "doctor," she
would be afraid and start crying. Then Padmini would beat her. When she
was being beaten, she would wet her pants out of fear, and they would
beat her to make her stop.
To show that she was Saiva, devoted to Siva, Arivaraci wore sacred
ash, a sign of desire burnt and cooled to eternal barren purity. Saivas are
renouncers, ashes the final mortification of the flesh. Arivu would spread
the ashes over her forehead, taking great care that they should be even,
filling in the gaps with touches of her finger. Sometimes, using them like
talcum powder, she whitened her whole face with them. Worldly desires
merged with release from the flesh.
PONNI

". . .by whose origin the unblessed sicken . . . "
Tirukkovaiyar, 5.

" . . . Enter, for this is your home . . . "
Tirukkovaiyar, 399.

Modday was a servant of the household, belonging to the lower caste
of Nayakars. All the other inhabitants of the household, including the two
other indwelling servants, were relatives. Although she was of a lower
caste, Modday was never excluded on grounds of "purity" from any of

The Lives of Children

/

237

Plate 34. Arivaraci.
the household activities. She often cooked for the family, and she ate
from the same plates as the family.
Nevertheless her life was hard. She ate her one meal a day at 10 P.M.
She rose at 4 A.M. to get water, carrying on her head and in her arms ten
to twenty gallons at a time. She did almost all the family laundry, washed
almost all the pots and pans, cleaned the drainpipes, and performed many
miscellaneous tasks. Anni and Padmini addressed her in loud voices with
words steeped in vitriol. They never spoke to her gently, they never joked
with her. I had seen other lower-caste servants, Paraiyars, much lower in
the caste hierarchy than Nayakars, talk back to Annan and Anni—answer
loud and angry words with loud and angry words. Modday evidently did
not have this option. I never saw her try to argue.
Modday's two-year-old daughter, Ponni, wandered about crying or
masturbating, or slept alone in a comer of the floor, covered with flies,
while her mother worked. She looked sick. Her belly was more swollen
than Sivamani's, her arms and legs more thin, her hair was falling out,

238

/

The Lives of Children

she drooled constantly. Observing that Ponni's condition was deteriorating, Anni at last took her to the doctor's "for a blood test." The doctor, a
close family friend, prescribed a concentrated protein solution. I believed, as the doctor through his prescription had apparently tried to
signal, that Ponni's main problem was insufficient nourishment. I confronted Anni and Ayya with my distress. I told them that they were
keeping me fat enough with all the ghee they poured on my meals. This
was not how I wished to be repaid for the money I gave them. Surely, at
least while I was there, they could afford to feed this tiny child adequately.
Anni responded by telling me that Modday was a good worker but she
had too much pride (timir). They took her in when she was a child of nine
from a household of her own caste that was not treating her well. When
she came of age, the other household found a husband for her and married
her off. She ran away from him to live with another man. After some
months she returned to the house battered and emaciated. Her husband
had beaten her. She would not return to him. An old man was with her.
The old man said that she had left her husband for a rickshaw driver, then
left the rickshaw driver for someone else.
The family took her in again, said Anni. After about a month, they
found that she was pregnant. They tried to convince her to have an abortion, but she stubbornly refused.
For the birth, Anni had taken Modday to Chingleput Hospital. (Anni,
Padmini, and Mohana had had their babies in a nursing home in Madras.
They said that the doctors at Chingleput Hospital had a reputation for
murdering patients. It was a very scary place.) Anni said that after Ponni
was born, Modday had the habit of asking for Ponni the same things that
the other children in the house received. It is the custom in all houses, said
Anni, for there to be differentiation between the child of the servant and
the child of the master. Modday should have known this, and she would
find out if she went to work in other people's houses. There, she would
not be allowed to eat off the same plate as the family; a separate plate
would be kept for her. Here, it had been ten years since they had observed
even that distinction.
Nine months after Ponni had been born, her father had appeared at the
house, asking to take away Modday and Ponni. Up until then he had not
made an appearance, said Anni. Modday said that she did not want to go
with him, she wanted to stay in this house. The family said that since they
had paid the two-hundred-rupee expense of having Ponni born in a hospital, they would not let Modday and Ponni go unless he would repay them
that amount. Maybe then he would understand the seriousness of mar-

The Lives of Children

/

239

Plate 35. Ponni.
riage. This demand frightened him away, said Anni. He left and never
returned.
Ayya told me that all the children in the household were treated
equally. Ponni was sick because she ate dirt. His own daughter Arivaraci
had had the same problem, and she had been the same way. They had
bought medicine for Ponni, but Modday herself wouldn't give it to her.
If Ponni was treated differently from the other children, it was her own
mother's fault. What motivation would they have for not giving Ponni
milk, when they gave it to the neighbors for free?
Ayya said that Modday herself separated Ponni off and demanded to
raise her in her own way. They would not interfere with a mother raising
her child. Besides, he said, when their own children were thin and not
fully nourished, in a household of fifteen with an income of eight hundred
rupees a month, they had taken in this pregnant woman, when everyone
else had refused. Would I have done the same? Angrily I said, if the child
is in your own household, you should not allow her to become like this.

240

/

The Lives of Children

If you don't have the means to take care of her, you shouldn't have taken
her in in the first place. Ayya gazed at me silently, incredulously, tears in
his eyes, and then answered, "Maybe you're right."
Later I pondered, could it be that Modday herself was responsible for
the starvation of her own child? Carrying her burden of laundry at noontime across the wide dry lakebed, Ponni trailing behind crying, Modday
would hurry to deposit her load at the house, then run back to pick her
daughter up off the hot sand. She would pin flowers, when she could get
them, into Ponni's thinning hair. She would steal moments from washing
dishes to play with Ponni. On one hand, Modday was sometimes harsh
with Ponni. When Ponni picked up a plastic block, Modday took it from
Ponni, put it in Jnana Oli's hand, and said unsmiling to Ponni, "Go. You
go." But on the other hand, when Ponni and Sivamani were playing
together, Modday, now smiling, taught Ponni to say "Go" to Siva, and
threatened to snatch Siva's penis away.
Modday would also tease Ponni the way the other mothers teased their
children. At night, when Ponni was crying, Modday pointed to an airplane flying overhead and said to her, "See! There goes an airplane! Go
catch it!" Ponni ran a little in that direction and then stopped short and
started crying. Modday drew Ponni close to her, smiling, saying, "It
doesn't matter. Don't cry," gently.
Later that evening, Ponni ran up to me. I sat her in my lap and offered
her a piece of fruit. Modday signaled me from across the courtyard to
stop. Then she crossed the courtyard with a load of dishes, stopped beside
me, and said, "Don't pick up Ponni and put her in your lap, and don't feed
her fruit. Those habits will come to her and they will scold me." I asked
if it was all right to play with Ponni without picking her up, and she said
yes. Then she whispered, "What they tell you is all lies. It is very hard
. . ." and stopped because Padmini was coming near. Padmini asked her
what she was saying to me. Modday said, "I told her not to pick Ponni
up." Padmini told me that I should not give bananas to Ponni because they
were bad for her, she could not digest them. A few days later, Modday
and Ponni were gone. The family told me that they had run away. After
a month, my son reported to me that Modday and Ponni were working at
another Reddiar house just down the road. But I never saw them again.
I realized that from one point of view, wh^it Modday had told me had
been right. Why make Ponni happy now, if denial of that same happiness
later would only make her cry. She might well learn now that nothing
would be hers to have forever. I remembered the philosopher Patanjali's
adage, "Even in pleasure, there is the pain of knowing it will end." But
Modday had never heard of Patanjali. And all I knew at this point was that
I had no answers.

CHAPTER EIGHT

Final Thoughts

After having recited the last verse of Tirukkdvaiyar that he
was to read to me, verse number 399, Themozhiyar
paraphrased it: "The heroine has been temporarily deserted
by her husband for the sake of another woman. The heroine
is god [civam]. The other woman is the world [ulakam].
"One day, the other woman comes to visit the home of
the heroine. She does not know what she will find there.
The heroine welcomes her, and offers her everything she
has. She says that they stand in the same place, therefore
they are true kin of the body [meyyuravu]. The home of the
one is the home of the other, the child of the one is the child
of the other. The heroine does not say to her rival, 'Go
away, the child born of my body belongs to me.' She says,
'This child is yours.'
"Shamed [velki] by the generosity of the heroine, the
other woman hides her face and departs. But to say that she
hides herself means she will stand naked. To say that she
goes away means she will return."
It remains now to give an accounting of what has been described in the
chapters preceding, a catalogue of patterns.
In the introduction to this volume, three themes were mentioned as
threads intended to bind together the whole. The action of mutual expectation between India and America, or between any two different perspectives, was one theme; the relation between ideal and experience was a
second; ambiguity and the sacred was a third. These three threads are
tightly woven together: the sacred is an ideal manifested ambiguously in
241

242

/

Final Thoughts

experience; it is born in the thought that arises between two separate
consciousnesses—male and female, East and West, wild and cultured,
human and divine. No one being may hold it within himself. Another
name for this exceedingly complex reality may be love.
We may focus on any one aspect of this truth with many names. It is
difficult to focus upon all of it at once. In this book I have tried to focus
on the very quality that keeps it out of focus, its inherent ambiguity. I
have tried to say in different ways in all the preceding chapters that
ambiguity is not something to be gotten rid of, even in a scientific analysis
of human behavior. Ambiguity is crucial to all kinds of understanding
between human beings. Every event has more than one meaning, and will
as long as more than one person lives on the earth. A related assertion
would be that the need to love is as important a force in human society as
is the will to power. Power wants to destroy or consume or drive away the
other, the one who is different, whose will is different. Love wants the
other to remain, always nearby, but always itself, always other.1
Of course these assertions go far beyond the material of my text. I
make them in order to indicate the flow to which I would want this text to
contribute its small momentum.
Coming back down to the scope of events discussed in this text, we
may consider a kind of repeating order suggested by these events. Maintaining our focus upon ambiguity, we may notice that, in Tamil culture,
there exist some similarities in form between certain kinds of poetic ambiguity and certain kinds of psychological ambiguity. It is possible that
ambiguity in both these areas serves similar, unifying functions, poetic
ambiguity allowing for the unification of disparate cognitive patterns, or
world views, psychological ambiguity allowing for the unification of
disparate emotional patterns, or personalities.2 In both cases, of course,
what is being discussed is communication—idealized communication on
the one hand (the performance of Tamil poetry), ordinary communication
on the other (the conveyance of personal views and feelings in prosaic
contexts). A list of similarities between poetic and psychological ambiguities can even be drawn up. I do not try to pretend here that my catalogue is in any way exhaustive, or that there is any kind of perfect parallelism between Tamil poetics and Tamil family life. But certain parallels
are there.
It will be seen that all the patterns of ambiguity I describe below have
to do with defining the relationship between self and other. The question
of what is me as opposed to what is you is in general precisely what is left
up in the air. Hence it would seem that, as life proceeds, what happens to
the self is neither individuation (i.e., increasing differentiation of self
from others) nor internal integration (i.e., crystallization of a stable sense

Final Thoughts

/

243

of self), but rather a continuous ¿^crystallization and ¿^individuation of
the self, a continuous effort to break down separation, isolation, purity,
as though these states, left unopposed, would form of their own accord
and freeze up life into death.
In passing, it may be observed that some of the decrystallizing patterns
of communication commonly employed in Themozhiyar's family are
very similar in form to what are called, in Freudian terminology, defense
mechanisms. It would perhaps not be surprising to find that the same tools
that are used to defend the boundaries of the ego in one culture are used
to dismantle these boundaries in another. But I leave it to other researchers to follow up on this possibility.
MIRRORING/TWINNING

Repeatedly in this family, a pair of children or adults would be linked
with each other by themselves or by others and defined as balanced and
equivalent: equal in some ways, opposite in others, a matched set, mirror
images, twins. The names of such a pair of matched personalities might
be merged into a single compound word when people called them or
spoke of them, as Olisiva or Arivumankai. They might have matched
nicknames, such as Periyavar ("the elder man") and Cinnavan ("the younger man"), or Petti ("the big girl") and Cinni ("the younger girl"). If they
were born at the same time and place, as were Arivaraci and Mankaiyarkkaraci, even their full names might echo each other. Twinned
children of the same sex were dressed alike. They were also often physically paired on the right and left sides of an adult caretaker's body, and
when they were carried, their respective mothers exchanged them.
When people discussed the personalities of children who had been
twinned, they molded them into mutual complementarity. According to
adults' accounts of them (and the children's behavior was roughly in
accord with these accounts), Mankai was smarter, bolder, more aggressive, and younger; Arivu was duller, more timid, more obedient, and
older. Jnana Oli was proud; Sivamani was humble. Arulmori was a sweet
speaker, a graceful dancer, and a father-charmer; Umapathi was a rough
speaker, a tough fighter, and a rebel. The definition of children within a
household as each other's balancing partners is not a process unique to
Tamil Nadu. American mothers describing their different children are
inclined to do the same thing. Children growing up together create themselves in opposition and complementarity to one another. In the Tamil
household, however, this process was not merely noticed but enhanced
and encouraged in many ways.
In the Tamil joint family, also, twinning processes were not completed

244

/

Final Thoughts

in childhood but were continued into adulthood or might even commence
there. Adults would twin each other as they twinned sets of children,
comparing and contrasting, pair-by-pair. Ayya was "the younger one,"
the skillful and impatient; Annan was "the older one," the patient and
unskilled. Anni was the wise, who knew and kept things hidden; Padmini
was the simple, who spilled everything out. Mohana was Padmini's
"wife"; Padmini was Mohana's "husband." Mohana was timid and
couldn't stand up for her rights; Celvi was bold and could. The combinations were endless.
What purpose did twinning serve? We might answer by asking, Did it
need a purpose? When Anni conversed with me in the afternoon, describing the contrasts she saw between Annan and Ayya, there was no information that needed to be conveyed. Anni found pleasure in creating a
symmetry through her words; this kind of conversation was the poetry she
made.3 She would have disavowed the lofty title "poetry," the pleasure
she would not have disavowed. The feeling of harmony among people, of
many different harmonies, the harmony of many people working on a
simple task that could have been done by one or two, even the harmony
of a good fight, this aesthetic feeling was treasured by Anni. Life itself
was art for her. Where we find cultural patterns, seemingly so natural and
artless, in terms of bare survival so extravagantly purposeless, in the
finely crafted tapestry of Tamil kinship systems, for example, could people like Anni have been at work?
But in worlds beyond our own, where, as Boas long ago discovered,
ornament and utility are not separate categories, poetry can also serve a
purpose.4 So let us return to the question, What purpose did twinning
serve?, and answer it differently.
If the feelings of those who were twinned in the Tamil household were
at all like those of people born as biological twins, who often feel that
they are scarcely separate individuals, then we might hypothesize (rather
banally) that twinning fostered solidarity within the family, the more so
if each person had more than one "twin" and all were involved in a
network of complementarities. The cross-cousins Mohana and Padmini,
structurally rivals, were in their feelings like yin and yang—each the
complement of the other, neither complete in herself but each finding her
completion in her partner, closely mingling their identities as they shared
food from the same pot and mothered each other's sons. When one member of such a pair looked across at her opposite, she might well ask, is that
person me, or not me? And there would be no clear answer. And she
might have many opposites, and therefore many faces she called "me."
The defense mechanism twinning most resembles is what Anna Freud

Final Thoughts

/

245

called "splitting," a state in which a person experiences, in mixed form,
two attributes that she would rather keep separate, and so assigns them,
in fantasy, to two different persons or entities—the giving breast and the
withholding breast, the loving mother and the devouring mother. In
Anni's family, the twinning process seemed almost to reverse this mechanism. Two initially separate people were rendered complementary and
then merged. The most-merged personalities (and so the least autonomous) were therefore those of adults.
The poetic device that twinning most resembles is rhyme. Perhaps it is
relevant to our argument that in colloquial Tamil, there are many rhymed
or otherwise matched-by-sound word-pairs that are used formulaically to
denote the two extremes of some category (e.g., anai-piinai, "elephant
and cat"; mahkai-tehkai, "mango and coconut"; tuni-mani, "clothes and
ornaments"; medampallam, "hill and valley"; adumadu, "goats and cattle"; maman-maccan, "uncle and nephew"; amma-appa, "mother and
father"; and so forth). Hundreds of such pairs exist, they come up often
in conversation, and there is even a productive process for creating a
pseudo-mirror for some term (replace the first syllable of the term with ki,
as in Vishvanathan's coinage, Bournvita-kinvita, to denote a miscellaneous collection of breakfast drinks he had to prepare). The creation of
mirror-pairs is thus a linguistic as well as an interpersonal device with
wide currency among Tamil speakers. Moreover the linguistic device, the
creation of matched names, is an important part of the psychological
strategy of twinning pairs of people.
COMPLEMENTATION/DYNAMIC UNION

It happens often that a person performs an act in order to get a certain
response, but instead, the opposite response is forthcoming. Then, instead of changing her way of behaving, the first person repeats the original message, even more strongly than before, and the original negating
response is repeated, more strongly than before, so that, for instance, the
more I reach out to you, the more you withdraw, and the more you
withdraw, the more I reach out. After a time, both people know that their
actions will elicit responses that are the opposite of those they seem to
desire, and yet both people persist in just those actions, so that it seems
they are trying to elicit the very behavior they ostensibly are trying to
oppose.
Some examples will make clear the nature of this pattern: Anni tries to
persuade Ayya to eat; he refuses. She persists, but the more adamantly
she persists, the more stubbornly he refuses. She knows that if she left

246

/

Final Thoughts

him alone, he would eat of his own accord; he knows that if he ate just a
little, she would cease to harass him. Yet they carry on their gustatory
wrestling match, as though the struggle itself was something they valued.
Or again, Arivaraci weeps at the thought of going to school; Padmini
beats her to make her stop weeping; Arivu weeps more loudly, and Padmini beats her more. Or again, Jnana Oli demands attention from Annan.
Annan plays with him in hopes of appeasing him, but the more Annan
plays, the more Oli demands. Or again, Jnana Oli goes into a pout. The
women beseech him to join them, but this only causes him to pout more
conspicuously, and so forth.
This way of acting is very similar to what Bateson calls complementary schismogenesis.5 There are some important differences, however,
For one, Bateson's schismogenesis is the creation of no human agent, it
arises spontaneously, as when I spill blue paint and you spill yellow,
neither of us sees the other, and the green paint that is formed is the
consequence of no one's plan. Participants in Bateson's schismogenesis
do so blindly, not realizing the direction in which their behavior is leading
them, whereas in our Tamil family, it was evident that participants in
what I call complementation knew exactly what they were doing. Second,
for Bateson schismogenesis was a destructive process, hurting people and
driving them apart, whereas in our family, the process of complementation had distinct rewards; this was why they engaged in it. Chief among
the rewards, surely, was maintenance of engagement, continuation of the
relationship in a dynamic mode that would have been curtailed if someone
had done the "right" thing and the conflict, whatever it was, had been
resolved. Thus Anni did not want to finish her work as quickly as possible, did not want to have no one to argue with, for quiescence and solitude
felt bad to her. Perhaps they were too much like death. To maintain the
tension and so keep the engagement alive, to give the engagement a goal,
a teleology as it were, and to keep this goal forever receding, is a specific
Tamil strategy, much like the Romantic Quest still shaping much EuroAmerican behavior,6 but with the crucial difference that the European
valorization of lonely striving for union is replaced in the Tamil case with
the striving for perfect balance within an already realized union of agents,
a union whose continued life is composed of this very striving, the tension
and movement generated by imbalance. Tamil people consciously work
to keep alive this living union, by never allowing balance to be achieved.
One institution exemplifying the valorization of dynamic union is
Tamil money-lending etiquette, in which people intentionally never settle
accounts completely one way or the other but always add one rupee extra
to their repayment, so that there will always be reason for the two parties

Final Thoughts

/

247

to the exchange to meet and do business again. Ayya's refusal to end his
lessons on the final verse of a poem followed the same principle. But the
prime example of this tendency to keep union alive through the maintenance of unresolved tensions is the "Dravidian kinship system" (or better,
the mutually reinforcing patterns of marriage, child-rearing, emotional
organization within the household, and political organization within the
kindred, which are played out in a great many ways by people involved
in South Indian life). Dumont's main assertion about this "kinship system," as I read him, is that it is maintained precisely for the sake of a
constantly renewed, never-completed engagement between two parties
("categories of kin"), hence the title of his book Affinity as a Value. What
I have observed in Tamil Nadu supports Dumont's conclusion that Tamil
people arrange their lives as they do and subscribe to certain ideals of
human organization largely because they are motivated by this desire to
maintain a living affinity, an imbalance constantly moving toward but
never resting at balance. I depart from Dumont in believing that the
foundation of "Dravidian kinship" is not only the intellectual-aesthetic
satisfaction derived from contemplating the symmetry of relations between categories; nor is the meaning of Dravidian kinship the perceived
necessity (on the part of some) to create a viable power structure within
the South Indian context; nor does the encompassing, consuming capacity of a hierarchical system of social organization entirely explain why
certain people in South India feel constrained to call certain others by
certain names, marry certain others, sustain certain others. Behind the
millenia-old perpetuation of Dravidian kinship, fueling it, giving it momentum, there also burns longing between actual human individuals,
longing aroused in part by the experiences of childhood and in part by
mythic and ideal patterns that people seek to live out but which, in their
actual lives, they can never fulfill. Longings pull against longings, ideals
against ideals, the act of seeking fulfillment only intensifies the desire, so
tension is maintained and the pattern of complementation repeated
indefinitely. When I marry my child to my brother's child, I do not satisfy
my longing for my brother but only set the stage for a similar longing to
emerge in the next generation.
A number of Tamil poetic devices correspond with, or enter into,
processes of dynamic union between living persons, ideals (categories of
persons), or groups. We must recall, first of all, that the symmetry of the
"Dravidian kinship system" is more than anything else a terminological
symmetry7—that is, it establishes a certain order in the world by calling
certain beings by the same name and so effecting a partial identity among
them, or by calling attention to this partial identity and thus rendering it

248

/

Final Thoughts

more cognitively salient. When I call both my mother's brother and my
father-in-law by the name mama, I recognize, by so naming them, that
in some respects I may regard them as identical. But one fundamental,
perhaps universal, poetic process is the establishment of identities
through naming, that is, through metaphor. Take a poem by Rilke that
begins, "Spring has come again. The earth is like a child that knows
poems by heart"; having established this identity, Rilke's poem continues
talking of the earth no longer as though it were like a child but as though
it were a child: "For the vexation of long learning, she gets the
prize . . . " Having learned this poem, we may come to think of the earth
as of a class with female children and may always call it "she." If a
metaphor "takes" in this way, a poetic order is established in the world,
and we may be more inclined to treat the earth in some of the same ways
that we treat a living female child. So it is with Dravidian kinship terminology. If this terminological system is not the origin of identities between father-in-law and mother's brother, it is an important means of
rendering those identities salient and making them part of a perceptible,
larger pattern. The pattern established by the symmetry among words for
kin lends an order to behavior as, in general, poetic features of language
(such as metaphor) lend an order to life.
We are talking not only about metaphor, however, but about complementation, or dynamic union, as an effective poetic process in Tamil life.
Such a process cannot be illustrated through a set of words taken out of
time, as the set of "kinship terms" in Tamil, but can only be observed in
linguistic or other acts taking place in time—specific sentences, poems,
or conversations, or specific marriages or life histories or kindred histories. We have already considered a few nonverbal (or only partially verbal) micrpevents illustrating complementation in the life of the Tamil
family. If we consider more fully verbal events, we stand more squarely
in the realm of pure poetics, and in this realm, in Tamil, we may observe
the same general valuation of the struggle, the desire never to reach
balance though constantly striving for it, that we find in day-to-day Tamil
life.
Here we will consider just one example of complementation in Tamil
poetics, Porutcelvi's poem found early in chapter 6. Outside of its context, there is nothing "remarkable" about this poem, written by a schoolteacher assiduously following all the textbook rules of poetics as she
writes and, at the same time, giving voice to particular strong, culturally
sanctioned feelings that she holds. In this poem, Porutcelvi employs a
number of devices that are either so common as to be almost mechanical
in Tamil poetry or which are actually obligatory there, occurring not only
in written poetry but in virtually all Tamil oral poetry (that I am aware of)

Final Thoughts

/

249

as well. The important point to note here is that all these devices have the
effect of maintaining tension, forestalling resolution.
In the first place, lines are paired. Each pair of lines is linked by
enjambement—metrical units do not correspond with grammatical units;
before a metrical line is ended, a new statement is begun; the listener must
wait for the beginning of the next line to learn how this statement begun
earlier will end—and then the ending in most of Porutcelvi's couplets
turns out to be a paradox (e.g., "He renounced his kin. In justice / He fed
his own")- Suspension, in the form of enjambement, is traded for tension,
in the form of paradox, and so the poem proceeds, couplet by couplet.
Both paradox and enjambement are basic poetic strategies in Tamil.8
Porutcelvi is following well-trodden paths when she uses them as she
does.
Second, in each pair of lines there is strong initial rhyme, weaker
internal rhyme, and never any end-rhyme, so that at the end of any couplet there is no strong sense of closure. This absence of end-rhyme is
characteristic of all Tamil poetry. In part it is an artifact of the grammatical structure of Tamil, which specifies most basic grammatical categories
by means of suffixation and so limits the possibilities for interesting endrhyme. In Celvi's poem, each couplet ends with the same suffix, -an
(masculine singular ending—she is writing about her brother), except the
very last couplet, which ends in -ay (second person singular ending), so
that the poem leaves the hearer with a markedly unsettled feeling. Moreover, the ending of this poem is a question, an angry challenge demanding a response, "Why did you make him your kin? Why / Did you hurt his
tender heart?" One actual human being addresses another in this poem:
Porutcelvi is speaking directly to her brother's wife Padmini. She is not
forgiving or explaining, she is accusing, putting her accusation in the
form of a question. Matters are not settled, a response is demanded, and
only an angry response is possible. So the internal tension of the poem,
never resolved, is merged with the irresolvable tension bonding the
sisters-in-law in lifelong enmity.
SEQUENTIAL CONTRAST

There are stories in Hindu mythology, as in Chinese Taoist philosophy,
of dreams that exist within waking that exist within still more dreams. I
am a king who dreams he is a pauper, who dreams he is a king, who
dreams he is a pauper, and so forth, until I do not know which is the
waking reality and which the dream. The point of such stories is that both
dreams and waking are equally real.
As in so many Indian tales, which like to play with the boundary

250

/

Final Thoughts

between dream and waking, theater and actual life, sacred and profane,
so in Indian visual art there occur many double-entendre images, in
which, for instance, lotuses alternate with stars, or birds with fish, or
female symbols with male ones. The onlooker can see one pattern and
then the other, in sequence, but can never resolve them into one, or see
both at one time, or decide, finally, which is the "real" figure and which
the "real" ground. The mind flashes back and forth. The effect is like that
of a strobe light.
I have tried to show that in Tamil marriage patterns as they are enacted
over successive generations, the opposed relationships between spouses
and opposite-sex siblings may enter into a sequential alternation of this
sort, so that generation by generation, the spousal relation and the sibling
relation (or more generally, relations of "affinity" and relations of "consanguinity") are transformed back and forth into one another endlessly.
In face-to-face interactions, the sequential alternation of opposite feelings or relations happened often in our Tamil home when adults dealt with
children, as when they teased them by alternately offering and withdrawing a toy, or alternately punished and comforted them. Adults among
themselves likewise enjoyed alternating between emotional modes we
would call extreme and contradictory. To hang on to a single feeling was
not a moral imperative for them.
The working of karma, as presented in Attai's lullaby or in the
justifications offered by Ayya and Anni for deprivations and punishment,
also showed this kind of pendulum pattern. Proximal sorrow would
surely turn into distal pleasure, present happiness into future pain, and
then one step further, it might change back again—an endless round.
Again, these Tamil pendulum patterns were reminiscent of Chinese
Taoism in that opposites were shown to depend upon one another and to
generate one another: the seed of kinship was contained in affinity, the
seed of reward in punishment, the seed of quiescence in activity, the seed
of tears in laughter, the seed of laughter in rage. Hence there could be no
permanent separation of opposites. One could not stay permanently angry
with the punishing mother, because she soon became the loving mother.
A sister would not be permanently parted from her brother, because their
children might wed. Living in a troubled world, at very close quarters
with others, one learned to accept the bad with the good. We need only
set our own spatialized images of opposition and contrast into time to see
that all rhythms are transformations and reverse transformations of states
into opposite states and then back again, repeatedly. It was part of the
style of this Tamil family—one of their "habits," as they would say—to
dwell upon such rhythms. This is perhaps one reason why poetry, with its

Final Thoughts

/

251

very pronounced alternations and intricate flowing contrasts, was so important to them. Song is an art form in time; it cannot sustain unbridgeable
oppositions.
PROJECTION/INTROJECTION

Ayya was a master at this—as, for instance, when he punished himself as
a way of punishing his wife; or when his father distanced him and he in
turn distanced his father, and then Ayya himself came to distance his own
son and that son in turn distanced him; or when observing his son's
disobedience, he referred this attribute back to himself. Who was the
agent and who was the patient? Who was doing what to whom? Who was
mirroring whom or learning from whom or reacting to whom? It all
became obscure. By bouncing their feelings off each other in this way,
people became bound to one another, even through hostility.9 They populated on another with their own feelings, it seemed to me, and they populated themselves with the feelings of others. Like mirroring, projection
was a means through which personalities developed not singly but interdependently, shaping themselves to one another.
Habits and personality traits were transferred laterally, just as they
were handed down through the generations. The patterned organization
of kin helped channel the projections. Ayya would compare his two "sisters" with each other, projecting onto one what he had learned from the
other. Anni compared her various "aunts" in just the same way. Jnana Oli
and Sivamani had an affinity for each other that they inherited from their
mothers. Sisters-in-law infused each other with anger and with sexual
expectations. A son was expected in some way to embody his father, a
daughter to embody her mother. Anuradha was patient like Anni, Jnana
Oli was stubborn like Ayya, Arivaraci was nervous and thin like Padmini,
Sivamani was expected to have sexual troubles when he grew up because
his father had overstepped his sexual bounds, Ponni was despised because her mother was despised.
The "origin" of some particular habit or trait in the family—who first
had it, who passed it on to whom—would be impossible to determine.
Jorge Luis Borges has a story about this: the narrator sees a bit of godliness in an otherwise despicable acquaintance, a particular bit of kindness
or a shine in the eyes; he wonders where the acquaintance got this admirable trait, who he learned it from; he traces it back to a friend of the
acquaintance, then back from there to a friend of the friend, and so
continues his network analysis until he gets all the way back to God. 10
Personalities in the Tamil family also have a divine component, or

252

/

Final Thoughts

better to call it mythic. We have seen, for instance, how the rivalries
between the men and women in our family mirrored the divine rivalry
between the gods and the goddesses, and how each side even called upon
this divine rivalry for justification and support of its cause. A suffering
woman may compare herself to Nallatankal; a conflicted woman may be
devoted to Mariamman; a man torn between family life and asceticism
worships and emulates Siva; a man who believes he destroyed his son and
now seeks the lost son's forgiveness worships Ganesan.
When we reach the realm of mythology we return again to poetics.
Myths, like poems (I mean now Tamil poems, especially unwritten ones)
are unique in each performance, as each personality is unique, but originality is no more desirable for a myth or poem than isolation is desirable
for a person. They are made of transformed pieces of each other. When
we read a Tamil poem or hear a Tamil myth, only rarely do we know, as
we know in Porutcelvi's poem, for instance, exactly whose spirit animates it. There is so much intertextuality in South Indian stories, so much
projection into and introjection from other texts, so much borrowing and
lending, that it is meaningless to try to draw lines between texts or to say
what is the "authentic" version of some tale. As we speak of "intertextuality" among poems or myths in South India, so we may speak of "interpersonality" among human beings there. Considered in himself, a lone
man has no meaning. He is suffused with the feelings, the spirits and
substances, of those who live near him, and they are suffused with his.
We Americans place so much faith in the boundary drawn by our skin,
that thin physical membrane, that we build our whole concept of personhood there. Most Indians, as we have known for a long time, do not,11 so
they seem strange to us. Because, for them, their living within one another is a concrete, physical fact, we cannot grasp what they are to themselves. We try to enskin them, "encompass" them, pin them down and
control them, with our theories. The more we fail to face their ambiguity,
the ultimate unboundedness of their being, the less we are able to see
them.
INTERNAL CONTRADICTION/CATEGORY MEDIATION

Consider the law of the excluded middle: a thing cannot be both A and not
A simultaneously. This is a principle of logic, but it is often taken to be
a property of the natural world. For instance, we have a deep conviction
that a person must be either male or not male, and not male means female.
Anything else is an anomaly, a monster. If some of us (I mean now
Americans) defy this convention—if some men "act like women" and
some women "act like men," or if some men and women adopt "unisex"

Final Thoughts

/

253

clothing styles or in one way or another actually "change their sex," it is
because those men and women do not believe in the validity of "male"
and "female" as culturally defined opposites. There are no essential, irreducible differences between male and female as human types, such people feel.
In the Tamil family, also, as we have seen, there were androgynous
personalities—women who deliberately acted against the image of femininity, men who deliberately acted against the image of masculinity.
Ayya claimed he was a woman born as a man. Padmini took over many
masculine tasks. In general in South India, androgynous personalities are
many, both in myth and in life. More than a few women plow their own
fields, though the plow is known by all as a symbolic penis. Transvestism
among men is very common, and even "normal" boys can get away with
dressing up like girls, just for fun, and learn to move their bodies in
convincingly female ways. Siva is a hermaphrodite; pictures of Krishna
make him look like a girl.
Does this mean that masculine and feminine are not valid categories to
South Indian people? Are the women who plow or the men who dress up
as women questioning the essential opposition between male and female?
No. Indeed, androgynes are the very ones who make the most of this
opposition, who most articulately express or most convincingly enact the
belief that male and female are opposed cosmic forces, as different from
each other as black and white, as powerfully charged as earth and sky in
a lightning storm. Indian androgynes are not asexual, nor are they ungendered. Certainly, the androgynous personalities in the household that I
lived in were far from sexually neutral; they also expressed strong loyalty
to their gender and its principles, for the values of the two genders differed. Rather than attributing grim and unbending sexual differentiation,
or denial and repression of sexuality, to Indian peasant culture (our own
projections, certainly), we might consider the proliferation of androgyny
there to be one aspect of a pleasure in sexuality in its original polymorphous nature that we ourselves miss, together with an intellectual enjoyment of paradox, which, also, we fail to share. This is not to say that
sexual oppression, and repression, do not occur in India. But too often,
this is all that ethnographers see.12
In the Tamil household, intermediate kin-types were something like
androgynes—that is, they were A and not-A; they fulfilled a desire for the
impossible. By intermediate kin-types, I mean kin-types that fell between
the great polar categories of parent, child, sibling, and spouse and mingled their contradictory attributes. A man's anni, his older brother's wife,
could be something of a mother to him, something of a sister. Maman, the
mother's brother, and maccan, the older sister's husband, could be some-

254

/

Final Thoughts

thing of a brother and something of a father. Nattanar, the brother's wife,
could be a female husband. Many of the intermediate kin-types, such as
daughter-in-law, sister's son, brother's wife, also had the added connotation, secret spouse. All kinds of combinations occurred, including hybrids of male and female, sibling and spouse, own and older generations.
These hybrid relationships were generally not discussed as such, nor were
they explicated for the ethnographer inquiring after rules, perhaps because, like the equally omnipresent androgyny, they involved departures
from ideal types, or like Anni's cooking procedures, they entailed flexions of rules of separation that the ethnographer had read about and carried with her, as partially assimilated values, into the "field." Nevertheless, such hybrid roles and relationships were enacted openly in the
day-to-day life of the family. If one stepped a little beyond explication,
they were there for all to see.
The context-relativity of behavior sometimes meant that a person,
crossing contexts, became a temporary .A-and-noM, an embodiment of
seemingly incompatible properties, like Padmini having to act simultaneously the roles of hostess (generous and kind) and mill owner (tough and
tight-fisted), graciously and politely serving the labor supervisor and, at
the same, loudly arguing with him regarding how much to feed the workers. Or like Jnana Oli brandishing the stick with which Anni had "beaten"
him, half of him aggressing freely, the other half of him submitting to
punishment for threatening such aggression. Or like Sivamani changing
houses, confused as to whether he was in his cousins' house where he
would be indulged, or in his grandfather's house where he would be
neglected—his confusion deliberately increased by his mother and his
aunt.
Little children, as we have seen, could be caught and confused by
contradictions, but older people could use them to advantage. Because
unlikely combinations of culturally defined categories or properties were
allowed, there was room for a greater range of possible personalities,
there existed a greater range of possible relations into which one could
enter, and there remained available a greater range of possible modes of
being that one could assume without having to worry about maintaining
consistency. Hence one escaped a certain internal tyranny; one was not
bound too closely by any one rule of the self.13
HIDDENNESS

The meaning (porul, "substance'^ in a word is likened in some Tamil
poems to the light in the eyes, the heat in the fire, the scent in the flower,

Final Thoughts

/

255

the spirit in the body—a subtle power guarded by the form, hidden by it,
difficult to grasp. Thus, much high Tamil poetry is not straightforward,
its perceptible surface is a play of illusions, it seems to be saying many
different things, no one can know for sure what is inside.
In our study of this one Tamil family, we have seen many acts of
deliberate irony, many ways in which feelings were hidden by giving
form to their opposites, while at the same time, the hiding of certain
feelings was so conventional that in the very act of hiding them one
communicated their presence to others.
Ethnography in such a situation becomes a problematic exercise.14 For
there are many times when the "truth" that lies behind the "form" (we
never can escape our own folk-ontology) is not at all clear. If one asks a
man what his monthly income is and he says two hundred rupees, it might
in reality be ten thousand (for then he would certainly conceal his treasure), or it might be two hundred as he claims (for then he will have
nothing to conceal). The look on his face will not give him away. Or if
one asks a woman if her husband is good to her and she says no, she may
be lying (protecting her treasure) or she may not be. There is no way of
knowing for sure.
In the life of our Tamil family, the hiding of true feeling sometimes
took conventional forms, sometimes unique ones. To protect a child
against death by calling it an ugly name was a conventional act. To
disguise one's concern for its health by laughing at its swollen belly was
a more particular way of doing the same thing. (And a genuinely despised
person might also be called by an ugly name or laughed at, as was
Modday.)
As for conventional forms, they could assume a wide range of personal
meanings. The convention of avoidance and overt hostility between husband and wife sometimes embodied a hostility that was real; sometimes
it concealed a deep affection; sometimes it did both. The convention of
denial of overt affection between mother and child might harbor many
sentiments ranging from a desire to protect the child from external evil,
through a desire not to spoil the child, to true self-hatred projected onto
the child. An attitude of servitude toward a person might be assumed as
a sign of true submission, or as a means of achieving dominance and
control, or as both. An attitude of humility could be assumed as a sign of
pride. An acceptance of bodily impurity might signify perfect purity of
the heart. Seemingly cruel behavior might grow out of a feeling of love.
Why do Tamil people hide their feelings as they do? Certainly not for
the reasons that we hide ours—to maintain autonomy, show independence, avoid commitment, prevent rejection, protect ourselves from pain.

256

/

Final Thoughts

If one is to believe the bhakti poets, the pundits, the cinematographers,
the healers, the singers in the fields of Tamil Nadu, Tamil people believe
in abundant feeling, in letting it flow through the body and out through the
points of contact between human beings into the hearts of others.15 Why
then, do they also conceal it?
The reasons Tamil people have for the custom of hiding true feelings
are probably many. As a convention, as a form, this custom may turn up
in many places because of its very capacity to perform many tasks, to take
on many meanings. I have argued that many conventions in Indian culture
are maintained because of their polysemy, their rich ambiguity. If we
maintain this frame of mind and then step up to a higher level, we may see
that ambiguity itself is a convention of this sort, a form with many possible functions, an act (or a type of act) with many possible meanings.
But I think that the hiding of feelings in Tamil Nadu is generally not
meant as a cutting off of communication. It is not intended to make the
would-be knower of the feelings go away. Like all the other forms of
ambiguity discussed here, it encourages relationships to become and remain in a dynamic mode. It establishes a tension that binds self to other.
"Generosity only encourages greed," a Tamil proverb says. But Tamils
do not, for this reason, renounce generosity. To those whom one loves,
one gives without limits, and one expects their demands to be limitless.
The giving is not done to end the taking but to start or keep going an
endless, dynamic bond.
In much the same way as giving increases desire, hiding encourages
further seeking. In the West, as we know, the artful concealment of some
body parts is done with this goal in mind. In Tamil Nadu, a similar kind
of seductiveness sometimes is the force behind the hiding of feelings. The
pout, the extremes of self-punishment and self-denial, the refusal to eat,
the refusal to state the cause of one's tears, the harsh treatment of one's
own child, all of these acts invited embraces, indulgence, inquiries, attention. In a playful manner, to say a startling thing or to behave in a preposterous way, set people speculating about the truth inside, made them
realize that they had not yet fathomed all the complications within the
other, got them interested in exploring again. "I know you. Who knows
me? [Unnai nan ariven. Ennai yar arivar?]," said Ayya in a letter, quoting the poet Manikkavacakar. "I am a mysterious man [Nan oru marumamana manitan]," he said, using his own words. But was not everyone
this way? "To know the whole of a person is a very difficult thing," he
said. "All we can really know of a person is our relationship with them.
We make a mistake if we think that is all there is."

Final Thoughts

/

257

PLURALITY AND MIXTURE, BOUNDLESSNESS
AND REVERSAL

Love to the Tamil family, as we have seen, was kalattal, mixture, and
mayakkam, confusion, what Victor 1\irner called carnival and communitas, ideas that he, and we, surely got from Tamils, as well as
from Rajasthanis, Marathis, Ndembus, Cajuns, Chiapans, and many
other people around the world whom we still do not know very well.
In our Tamil family, the blurring of boundaries took the form of daily
reversals, some commonplace, some thought up on the spur of the moment, of whatever "real" relations were expected to be, and all of this was
done, people would say directly, out of love. Calling people by the wrong
kin term, by the wrong gender, calling your child "my child" and my
child "your child," and calling a house that belongs to me but not you (or
you but not me) "ours"—all these were examples of loving category
reversal between pairs of people who loved, or might love, each other.
But love went beyond pairing. Ultimately, as we have seen, it negated
pair-bonds, especially exclusive ones, and embraced everybody. Then it
took the form of the confusion of plurality, when one lost one's identity,
and one's loved one's identity, in the crowd. Weddings and festivals,
whose main point seemed to be the colorful and totally chaotic aggregation of huge numbers of people, were communions exalting plurality, and
so, to a lesser extent, were mornings in the courtyard and mealtimes. The
most strongly maintained value of Anni's household was the value of
communal plurality, in which all that stood for self and other, mine and
yours, was deliberately, creatively, repeatedly overturned. No single rule
was absolute, no single order held eternal sway.
The endless sea, the world full of countless creatures, the universe full
of countless worlds, the epic that goes on forever, the book whose expansion takes several lifetimes, the quatrain all of whose meanings can never
be told, the syllable that contains all truth, the family that always has
room for another child, the religion that always has room for another god,
the person made out of others, who are made of still others, the one
human being whose full nature can never be known—these are just some
of the boundless domains recognized in South Indian culture. How do we
grasp them? How do we make them our own?
In the end, perhaps we will just have to realize that some things are
ungraspable and unownable. We cannot find the "key" to Indian culture,
or to any one of its boundless domains, or even to one of its individuals.
Isn't it clear by now that the more we try to master, the more we will lose?

258

/

Final Thoughts

Perhaps we could take a methodological cue from Sivamani—try to be
a part of things, weep when we get hurt, and go on trying. It may help if
we can learn to accept the reality and the power of chaos—the unpredictable, the uncontrollable, the contradictory, the illogical, the unexplainable. It may be that chaos works best if our goal is truly ahimsa—to let all
the living live, to let each one speak and see in its own way. We do not
want to consume all others, leaving nothing but our own self. If our own
particular vision of truth can take its place among the multitude, then
really we will not have done so badly. We may even learn to keep life
going, "in these advanced times when all are one, and no one is alone."

Epilogue

When Keith and I returned with the children to Tamil Nadu in 1984,
Daniel was ten, and our second son Abraham was two going on three.
Themozhiyar's family had left their old house in the village and had
moved to a large apartment in the nearby town of Chingleput. Sivamani
and Jnana Oli were attending a Catholic school there, not for religious
reasons but because in the opinion of their parents the Catholic school
would give the boys the best education available in that district: most
importantly, the Catholic sisters would teach the boys English. A good
knowledge of English would enable them to get good, well-paying jobs
when they grew up. The school uniform the boys wore every day consisted of a clean white shirt and trousers and sturdy leather Oxfords.
In the four years since our previous visit, Jnana Oli had grown sweetly
shy and studious, while Sivamani had become tough, aggressive, and
athletic. Arulmori at the age of ten was gangly and foal-like and had come
to resemble her mother Padmini. Arivaraci and Mankaiyarkkaraci, both
thirteen, had metamorphosed into poised and graceful young women.
Arivaraci now was the more confident of the two. She liked my sparkly
crystal eairings and traded her goldplated ones for them.
Among the children, only Umapathi seemed to be the same person, a
layer of sauce and foolhardiness thinly concealing his vulnerable young
heart. On one occasion he tried to get Abe to climb out on the steep roof
with him. I think he was angry with Abe for something. It would have
been a fifty-foot fall.
The adults were all the same as they had been except for Attai, who had
lost her eyesight and also had broken her hip, so that she could neither
read nor walk and was in pain all the time. Her son, Annan, had had to
choose between an expensive hip operation for her and a private educa259

260

/

Epilogue

Plate 36. Aruljnanapperuveli.
tion for the two young boys (neither of them his own son). For the sake
of the future and for the strength of the family, he had chosen the latter.
While Themozhiyar was in the distant town of Madurai helping me with
my new project, he received a telegram from Annan saying that Attai had
passed away.
Keith returned with Dan to the United States in August of that year,
because his own mother was very ill. I returned with Abe in late October.
A year after that, Keith and I separated permanently. Now Keith occupies
the house that he built in 1979, with a little help from Themozhiyar and
from me. Dan and Abe are doing fine, though as they grow their memories of India fade. Abe seems a little more American than Dan, a little less
androgynous. Today (February 1, 1989) I got a letter from Themozhiyar
asking how this book is coming along, and saying he would like to see me
one more time before he dies. I guess I should go back there sometime
soon.
